
Mr. BOOKER. Mr. President, one of
those other programs that is now in
crisis is what I want to switch to. I
think my colleague was joking with me
because we have—for anybody who is
watching—we have a whole list of
things we wanted to get to. My staff,
now, seemingly very ambitious—Medicaid, Medicare, healthcare, Social Security is coming up now, tariffs and
economic policy, education, national
security, public safety, immigration,
housing—chapter by chapter, each one
about an hour or so. This would be
enough to make it until tomorrow
evening if I can stand that long and
who knows?
But we are behind schedule. So I am
going to jump in to talk about Social
Security. I want to start because, as I
said earlier, I get to stand here. I get to
come to this floor, but so many millions of people don’t. I want to elevate
their voices tonight.
As I go across New Jersey, as I go
across my Nation, I see Republicans,
Democrats, Independents—there are so
many people stopping me in airports,
in the community, stopping me in the
grocery store, wanting to tell me that
they are afraid, that they are angry,
that they are worried, that they believe we are in crisis, that our Nation
is at a crossroads. Whom are we going
to be as a nation?
This topic, I don’t know, maybe I will
just let you all know that this topic—
my mom chewed into me about this
topic. She lives in a senior citizen retirement community, mostly Republicans. I visited her many times. It is a
great community. I hate how we go to
this idea of right or left. These are
great seniors that live in a great community, and they are talking about Social Security.
I want to read—start with this section by just reading—these are people
sending to me. This is a small postcard,
handwritten from somebody from Hamilton Square, NJ:
Dear Senator Booker, I am writing to ask
you if my Social Security is now in danger.
Please let me know. It is very important to
me. Thank you.
I am going to try to answer that tonight fairly and candidly. Here is another person who writes. My staff is
protecting their identity. I just want
to say where they are from. South
Plains, NJ:
I am one of your constituents and a proud
New Jerseyan. I am writing to let you know
how upset, distraught, and worried I am
about the current state of our country. I
hope you will take time and read my letter
as this is the first time I felt compelled to
write a government official.
I want to tell you, I am reading your
letter again, and I am now reading it
on national TV, if C–SPAN can be—the
Presiding Officer may challenge me
with a factual error, but C–SPAN is national TV, I think.
I want to start by telling you a little about
myself. I am 64 years old and I am currently
working full time. I am a breast cancer survivor. My plan was to retire in the next 3
years, but with the current state of chaos
and turmoil, I honestly don’t see how I can
retire. I am concerned about Medicare,
which I will definitely need when I retire. I
will also need a supplemental plan for whatever Medicare does not cover. I do not qualify for retirement benefits through my job.
With the cuts being made to Federal programs, Medicare will not be enough. I would
need a more expensive supplemental plan to
cover these cuts.
I am also concerned about Social Security.
I have worked since I was 16, except for 9
years when I was home with my three children.
I have worked hard and paid into Social
Security and believed that the money was
for my retirement. Now I hear that Social
Security is a Ponzi scheme, and it may be
privatized. This is so unfair for people like
me that worked hard all their life and counted on this money to retire. I was planning to
work past 65 to get my full Social Security
benefits, but now I begin to wonder if it is
worth it.
So, at this point, I am in a holding pattern
due to the unstable climate in which we are
all living. As I said, I have three children
who are all adults now. My son has been diagnosed with being bipolar. He has been hospitalized a few times for this. He is currently
on medication that he needs to function and
sees a therapist. He is in grad school and is
on Medicaid. He works part time since he is
a full-time grad student. So he does not qualify for benefits.
I worry about what these cuts will do to
my son and others like him. No one seems
concerned with the people who rely on these
programs to live their best life. Someone
needs to look out and take an interest in
helping people in these circumstances.
My daughter is a teacher in a district that
receives title I funds. She works very hard as
a teacher and is devoted to her students.
With the dismantling of the Department of
Education, I am concerned about what this
means to the education field, teachers, administration, and students. My daughter’s
school is making a difference in the lives of
these students, and they need the funding
that is received from both the State and Federal Government. Programs like the title I
and other federally funded programs need to
stay in place.
On another topic—
This constituent is getting a lot into
her first letter to a government official, and I appreciate it.
On another topic, inflation: Increasing
prices and the overpriced housing market is
a huge problem. Placing tariffs on our biggest trade partners is beyond unfair. This
drives the cost of goods up, and the consumer is the one who ends up paying the increase. A lot of families are food insecure,
wondering where their next meal is coming
from. A lot of parents go without so their
children can eat. Food pantries and banks
are scrambling to meet demand. Something
needs to be done so families can survive.
The housing market is also an issue. Owning your own home is now unreachable for
most young people starting out. Interest
rates are high, and housing prices in New
Jersey are unaffordable.
Thank you for reading my letter. I am asking you, as our Senator, please stand up for
what is in the best interest of families, seniors, adults, and children in your district.
Tariffs, dismantling Departments like Social
Security, Medicare, Medicaid, Education,
and other services that are important to the
everyday person is not the answer. You are
our voice in the Senate. Please do the right
thing, and speak up, and continue to fight
for everyday Americans.
This is why I am standing up. This is
why I will stand here as long as I am
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A01AP6.000 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1962 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
physically able. This is why I continue
to tell story after story.
But, first, a little important history:
90 years. Our country has made a promise to people that, if you pay into the
Social Security Program your whole
life, your money will be there for you
when you retire. Franklin Roosevelt
signed the Social Security Act into law
84 years ago, and this is his quote. He
called it ‘‘a cornerstone in a structure
which is being built, but it is by no
means complete.’’ Social Security is
still a cornerstone. It is still the bedrock according to FDR. It is the bedrock of an edifice being built in a nation where we belong to each other. We
the people are building this. That is
our cornerstone. He called it Social Security. Today, 73 million Americans
count on Social Security. Millions
more than that are planning on those
benefits they earned being there for
them.
You heard from the first letters I
read that people are really worried.
The President of the United States
stood up in the State of the Union Address and talked about rampant fraud
because payments are going out. All
from conservative papers to ones on
the other side have shown that what he
was saying was not true. But they are
sowing chaos. They are attacking,
delegitimizing it, and calling it a Ponzi
scheme—DOGE leader Musk and the
President.
There are 73 million Americans who
are counting on Social Security benefits, and 1.6 million are in my State.
Forty percent of the people who rely on
Social Security—40 percent—have no
other source of income. They live paycheck to paycheck—Social Security
checks, excuse me. Social Security
checks.
Despite mocking Social Security and
calling it a Ponzi scheme, people in
communities like my parents’—my
mom’s—are beginning to worry. They
actually took real actions to lay off
thousands of Social Security employees, making it harder to process Social
Security applications and troubleshoot
questions from beneficiaries. They
didn’t roll out a plan to say: Hey, this
is how we are going to show that we
can give the best customer service
ever. We are going to bring in some of
the best private sector people to advise
on how we can use technology and innovation to give the best customer
service. Hell, roll in AI, and do all of
these things. We are going to make a
model of responsiveness to our seniors
because we are a society that respects
our elders, values them, wants them to
retire in dignity and security and peace
of mind. That is the big ambition.
No, that is not what was said.
Social Security employees, like
many employees, got letters that they
didn’t expect, saying they were laid off.
It didn’t matter how well they performed, and it didn’t matter what function they performed. It put in jeopardy
just trying to contact Social Security,
if you are retired or just trying to contact Social Security if you need to
apply for benefits. They tried to eliminate service by phone, saying that they
wanted to require in-person visits,
which is absurd for many seniors who
don’t have access to transportation or
who live in rural areas because—do you
know what they are doing also? They
are trying to close down many Social
Security offices, and I will get to the
specifics of that later.
These actions are harmful enough,
but they are just the beginning of what
our President and Elon Musk are saying they want to do to a program that,
for millions of Americans, is their only
check a week. It is essential for them
and for others. It is how they make
their retirement secure. You don’t protect the future by punishing the people
who built this country. You don’t fix
America by throwing seniors or veterans or Americans with disabilities
under the bus. That is not how we do
things. That is not how we should do
things. There are so many hard-working families who believe in this idea of,
if I work hard all my life in America, I
can make ends meet; I can raise my
kids; and I can retire with dignity.
Congress does have a responsibility
to be good stewards of taxpayer dollars. We should do more of that. I want
to do more of that. I want to help lead
in that fight. But none of us were invited to the table when it came to this.
This congressionally established program—FDR I read—but it was Congress
that established it and is now not being
included in the planning or in the procedures to try to improve Social Security or to make it more efficient or
more effective. We haven’t convened
hearings or task forces in a bipartisan
way to find out what we can do to better serve our seniors.
Instead, lies are being proffered
about Social Security making wrongful
payments. Lies are being proffered by
the highest office in the land and by
the most rich person in the land, who
does not need Social Security, who is
calling it a Ponzi scheme, who is telling people who are relying on it that
they are part of a Ponzi scheme.
But remember this: Social Security
is not the government’s money to
spend. It is the hard-earned savings of
working Americans, and it belongs to
Americans. The President and Elon
Musk need to keep their hands off of it.
It is not theirs to take, and it is not
theirs to break.
It is their scheme. They are the ones
who have a scheme, and it is not about
efficiency. It is not visionary. What we
need in America now are visionary
leaders who have bold, exciting visions
for things like what Social Security
can be. What they are doing is not only
wrong, but it hurts people; it scares
people. And it is not just people but
our elders—the people who raised us,
the people who built roads and highways, the people who served food, made
food, who started small businesses, who
raised generations. They are who we
are disrespecting.
So what happens in this context?
Why am I standing here?
It is because the people of New Jersey are saying: Why aren’t you doing
more? This is unacceptable, Senator
BOOKER. It is unacceptable. Hear our
voices.
My phones have exploded with people
whom the President and Elon Musk
have made terrified about what is happening to the Social Security service
and what is happening to their checks.
My staff said that we were overwhelmed with phone calls and emails
from people who were worried about
the direction that the President is taking Social Security. The people who
called were angry or terrified, and I
want to share some of these calls from
my constituents.
Here is someone from the great Cherry Hill, NJ:
I am very concerned that the President,
along with his cruel and inept administration and DOGE, are working to privatize and
ruin the Social Security Program.
I am a constituent, Senator Booker. I live
in Cherry Hill, NJ, and I am a senior who relies on Social Security income for my basic
needs, food, and housing. The mere idea of
not having those funds has caused me sleepless nights and wondering if I will become
homeless.
I am going to stop there for a second.
I remember President FDR and growing up hearing that what he did was get
on the radio not to stir up fear, not to
stir up chaos, but to comfort people, to
remind them that we are Americans,
and you have no need to fear. But this
President, just with his rhetoric alone
about Social Security, is driving my
constituents to write me notes like
this.
I continue with the letter from my
constituent from Cherry Hill:
I hope you will convince both Democrat
and Republican colleagues to prevent this
from happening. Trump lied when he promised during his campaign he would not touch
the Social Security Administration, but now
we see threats and already some actions toward making severe cuts and making the
program less accessible. I urge you to continue to fight for us.
(Mr. CRAMER assumed the Chair.)
Pennington, NJ:
My sister and I are older Americans who
are each disabled—one from a severe accident because of a drunk driver and the other
from a life-changing illness. We are alone
and take care of each other. For me, SSDI is
my one and only income. I have a few years
before I am at full retirement age. Even with
my check and splitting rent costs between
us, it is taking right under 50 percent of my
monthly check for rent alone.
Fifty percent.
This does not leave much to cover even the
bare necessities of health, vehicle insurance,
utilities, food, medicine—even a tight budget, especially with costs on everything continuing to rise.
Senator, as seniors, we are petrified about
what is happening to SSA. I must ask you,
Senator: What do we do if our monthly SSA
benefits are interrupted? How do we keep a
roof over our heads as disabled seniors? With
very limited savings, it would only take a
few months before the roof over our heads
would be in jeopardy. We just spent a small
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.065 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1963
fortune for us to move into a smaller, lower
cost apartment because we could not afford
significant ongoing rent increases. I realize
we are far from alone in our fears, but that
is of very little comfort as we spend our
nights unable to sleep, fearful we do not lose
our only income along with a roof over our
heads.
These are our elders.
Here is a constituent from Egg Harbor Township:
My husband and I live Social Security
check to Social Security check. Without
those checks we earned—without those
checks we earned—we are dead. Please don’t
let this outrageous administration take our
benefits away.
This is a constituent from
Runnemede, NJ:
I am a 75-year-old New Jersey resident. I
received my working papers in 1964, at the
age of 14. I worked continuously until I
reached the age of 70, in 2020. I enlisted in
the U.S. Navy in 1967 and retired in 1999. I
was on Active Duty from 1970 to 1977. I finished my career in the Naval Reserve. For 56
years, I paid my taxes and contributed to Social Security.
I have collected my Social Security for 4
years, and as you are no doubt aware, the
amount of money paid me monthly by the
Social Security Act was calculated by them
based on my contribution.
I am currently a full-time, 24/7 caretaker
for my invalid wife and do not have the luxury of earning a supplemental income. My
sole income is from Social Security and a
small Naval Reserve pension. My total
healthcare comes from Medicare and
TRICARE for Life.
The contract I made with the United
States Government was that they could use
my money during my working life with the
understanding that they would take care of
me when I could no longer earn for myself. I
have kept my part of this bargain for 56
years. Now, after only 4 years, the government is threatening to renege on our agreement.
Please, sir, do not let this happen, Senator
Booker. That is my money. I earned it. I
earned my Social Security by my contributions, and I earned my pension by my service.
Another constituent named Sara:
I have been a teacher in Atlantic County
for 26 years. My husband is a 100-percent disabled veteran who receives VA disability
payments as well as SSDI. We depend on the
VA and SSDI for approximately half of our
income for our family of five.
We are currently preparing our oldest for
his first year at college and are awaiting financial aid packages from several schools.
We are petrified that Trump and Musk’s
agenda is dangerous and will have life-altering consequences for families like ours.
We are counting on you, Senator Booker,
to do the hard work to protect the essential
benefits.
The destruction of the Department of Education is another completely horrifying situation. We need to protect our special needs
students and Federal financial aid for college-bound students. We need to protect the
idea that education is for all—
Education is for all. Education is for
all—
instead of a few elites who could just afford
it.
Rosie is another constituent. She
starts off proudly:
I am a senior, 84 years old.
God bless you, Rosie. My mom is 85.
My only income is Social Security—
She generously gives me confidential
information.
My only income is Social Security, $1,179
per month, and I am terrified that the current gang of thieves in the White House will
tamper with it under the guise of ‘‘saving
money.’’ If Social Security is cut off, I am on
the streets.
I can’t keep harping enough on the
traditions of our country, where Presidents, whether you agree with them or
not, whether they are from your party
or not—Ronald Reagan didn’t whip up
fear in bedrock commitments like Social Security or health. Barack Obama
didn’t shake people so that Republicans and Democrats in my State
would write me letters using words like
‘‘fear’’ and ‘‘terror,’’ would worry
about losing sleep when they have
enough things to stress over.
Here is Debra:
I am a retired widow. I depend on Social
Security to pay bills each month. I am concerned about the reports that Elon Musk is
to revamp and, in my opinion, ruin the Social Security Administration. I am worried
that payments will be disrupted. There are
many other things going on in the government today that I am also concerned about.
I hope that the Senators and Congress people, along with the judicial system, can
stand up to him and take back control of
government.
She says this is going to revamp and
ruin Social Security. This is just somebody simply saying—it is like, be plain.
Don’t make up lies about false payments. Don’t call it a Ponzi scheme.
Give us a bold vision of how it is going
to help more seniors, how you are
going to serve more seniors, how you
are going to improve the system, how
you are going to make it better, how
you are going to serve the dignity of
our seniors.
This is Holly. Holly is a constituent
too.
I am one of your constituents who is retired and relies 100 percent in order to live
on my earned Social Security benefit in
which I paid throughout my entire working
career. I call on you to maintain the Social
Security Program as it stood before the ascension of Trump and Musk. You must ensure that there are no missed earned benefit
payments or late payments made to recipients; especially, accessible Social Security
offices must remain open and fully staffed
with trained, experienced Social Security
employees in order to provide the kind of
regular, necessary customer service by
phone, online, and in person.
And the Trump-Musk administration’s
endless terrorist threats of dismantling the
Social Security Administration, insidiously
calling it a Ponzi scheme, working in order
to privatize it—it must cease and desist immediately.
Moreover you, Cory Booker, must reverse
and/or stop whatever draconian changes are
being made to destroy the Social Security
Administration with thousands of cuts to
needed employees with almost no notice and
no public input.
Social Security is being dismantled by an
unelected billionaire. At least for now, Musk
and his band of DOGE boys—not a real government department—who have illegally and
callously rifled through our most private,
personal information and done God knows
what with it, with their ultimate goal to
risk and/or steal the retirement funds of
older Americans by placing the Social Security Trust Fund in the hands of private corporate equity firms—seniors do not agree to
this. Seniors do not agree to this. Such action is illegal and completely unacceptable!
This constituent continues:
Furthermore, I am deeply concerned that
the ceaseless chaos will invite criminals to
exploit confusion around identity verification. Ironically, while the administration
claims these changes are meant to combat
fraud, they may very well do the opposite.
Hastily introducing new, unfamiliar technology and verification steps without any
real public education campaign will create
the perfect environment for criminals to deceive and defraud.
This late and ill-conceived change also
comes at a time when the Social Security
Administration is already struggling with a
customer service crisis, long hold times, low
staffing, delayed callback systems, confusing
announcements about possible office closures. This chaos has to be stopped now, Senator Booker.
I urgently ask you to please use your congressional power to reverse these changes
which are creating more confusion for older
Americans. Senior Americans earned Social
Security through a lifetime of hard, honest
work. I know I did. The money is ours, and
we deserve a properly run Social Security
Administration which continues to be administrated honestly through the Federal
Government, as established in 1935.
In fact, the narrative of the Social Security Act running out of money could be easily fixed if Congress wrote laws that slightly
increased the amount that high-net-worth
individuals—the wealthiest of the wealthy—
paid into the program.
Holly, God bless you.
My mother, in her senior community,
is seeing this rise in scammers trying
to steal people’s money, and she is
amazed at the technology they are
using. The scams involve the voices of
their relatives asking them for help
during a crisis. All that technology and
the wisdom of my mom—she is like,
why aren’t we using the technology
and innovations to make Social Security easier to use and easier to engage
with? Commonsense questions.
Carli, a constituent from New Jersey:
Please include disabled people when you
talk about Social Security and Medicare,
Senator Booker. You don’t mention us every
time. I paid into Social Security for 16 years.
I worked full time. I was sick almost every
day. I finally had to leave my job in 2015. I
was granted SSDI, and I am on Medicare.
And until I was injured last year, I had a
part-time job, where I continued paying into
the system.
I fear that the first people they will go
after are the disabled. We are not as capable
of fighting. People see us as lazy or fakers,
and we are almost never included in the conversations about marginalized communities.
Please don’t let me be erased.
Carli, you are not. I see you, and I am
standing here for as long as I physically can so that I can elevate your
voice and others’.
Patricia, a constituent from New Jersey:
I am 65 years old, a senior. I have worked
my whole life and paid into Social Security.
Will you please work hard and push back to
preserve these benefits? Without Social Security money and Medicare as well, I will
not survive. I am outraged—
VerDate Sep 11 2014 07:13 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.066 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1964 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Patricia writes—
to see what is happening recently. Help. If
there is anything you request of me—
My constituent says: If there is anything you need of me, please let me
know.
That is one of the most beautiful sentiments in America, is that people in
crisis who are racked with fear and
worry still are standing up to volunteer, retired seniors.
I am always moved when a constituent not only tells me what is on
their mind, how they are angry, how
they are worried, what their concerns
are, but they also say: Let me help you.
Let me help you.
Patricia, it is late at night, and you
are probably sleeping, but you helped
me tonight at 12:41 a.m.
The goodness and the decency of our
seniors, the kindness and generosity of
our communities, and what does our
President do to these people? He spends
time in the State of the Union Address
not calling us together, not calling us
to a common cause, not reminding us
that we share common values and common virtues; he spreads lies about Social Security and unleashes the
wealthiest man in the world to cut before he even understands the Agencies
he is cutting—a guy who, with the
same kind of cynical nature—I can’t
even fathom being as wealthy as he is;
it is not what I have sought in my
life—he calls it a Ponzi scheme when
constituent after constituent tells me
that is their only source of income,
that they paid into it all of their lives,
and now the most powerful person on
the planet and the richest person on
the planet are striking fear and worry
into seniors.
Yet, with all of that power, all of
that money, a constituent from New
Jersey tells me about what she is concerned with and then says:
If there is anything you request of me,
please let me know. I am here to help.
‘‘I am here to help.’’
That is the country I know and love,
not the fearmongers and the demagogues and the spreaders of lies but the
good decency of Americans who, even
in their time of crisis, ask the question: How can I help? How can I help.
Helen from New Jersey:
Senator Booker, please stand up to Musk
and Trump to save, protect Social Security
and Medicare. My life and my husband’s life
depend on it. We are senior citizens who
worked and paid our share of taxes for over
50 years. We now need those benefits to survive.
Here is Janet, one of the hundreds—
I am sorry to my staff—thousands of
people who have written, emailed, and
called. One more. Janet:
I oppose the closing of Social Security
field offices. If anything, more field services
should be opened if phone support is cut
back.
In 2022, while living in Wyoming, I started
on Social Security. There were issues, and
thank God for the local field office in Cheyenne because they were the only people who
could physically look at my documentation,
realize what was happening to me, submit
corrections, and enter notes in the system
that the Social Security phone support could
see. It took four or five trips to my local
field office to resolve it.
I had previously gotten nowhere with Social Security phone support. Today, I read
the list of field offices that are slated to be
closed, and they appear to be in rural areas.
The people who live there might have to
drive a full day’s drive several times to apply
for and follow up on their benefits. It is not
fair. It is not fair. It is not fair. It is not fair.
Across the country—my office hears
from—it is not just New Jersey. Across
the country, people are frustrated and
feel like nobody listens. We get calls
from across the country. My staff
doesn’t say: You are not from New Jersey, so we are not going to talk to you.
My staff is just incredible people I have
surrounding me in the office who remind me of the values I treasure.
So they wanted me to include tonight people not from New Jersey because, again, we hear from thousands
of people in my State and so many
around the country.
Here is Maria Caranci from Springfield, Delaware County, PA:
My name is Maria Caranci.
Forgive me, Maria, if I am pronouncing your name wrong.
I am 78 years old and live in Springfield,
Delaware County, PA.
When I was 16, I received my first paycheck and saw money was taken from my
earnings. I learned that about FICA, the special government savings account that I
would put part of my earnings into until I
retired. This was how I could pay bills in my
old age. It was something I could always
count on. My earnings history shows the
good and bad times, including the gaps when
I received unemployment.
My chosen career was in mortgage banking. Banking mergers, dramatic changes to
interest rates, and even bank lending regulations meant times of unemployment with
few options or jobs or accepting temp employment. I had to make the choice.
Every paycheck withheld FICA. I was almost 65 when I began my career at the bank
offering decent pay with overtime. It was
2010. I had two goals to meet for my retirement: a mortgage-free home and working
until I was 70, earning the maximum benefit.
Underwriters that I worked with had
shown me what they felt added security to
my personal finances. So I was diligent with
setting up my emergency savings account. It
would be there for anytime my Social Security check didn’t cover my expenses on my
home or me getting older. So I often worked
until 10 p.m. at night, delayed taking days
off, making goals possible.
The Social Security Administration sent
information about my future benefit payments, so I made a budget and determined
my escrow for taxes, insurance, and home
maintenance to be taken from my benefit.
I knew how much I would have per week
for my living expenses once my mortgage
was paid. I used the overtime income from
my emergency savings account. Everything
relies on my receipt of my monthly check
from Social Security.
The recent assault on Social Security has
me terrified. People who were not elected,
vetted, or made to swear an oath to protect
our U.S. Constitution have taken our personal data, saying that they are searching
for fraud. Errors are being made with this
new regime and no clear resolution in sight.
Why do they need my personal information
that includes my Social Security number,
work history, and bank information? In February, my identity was stolen. When thieves
moved my mail using a postcard sent to
USPS, my bank statement and a copy of my
paycheck were forwarded to the thieves before I got the USPS notice of the change.
I froze my credit then and have done so
later since TransUnion has the Bose address
listed as a fraudulent one on part of their report but also has another address for mail
that have to be returned to the sender.
I have quit fighting the data entry mistake, but I remain diligent and alert if mail
is due and doesn’t arrive. What can I do
about this new group of identity thieves
known as DOGE?
Until recently, I had confidence in my ability to provide for myself because I lived in
the United States of America, a republic governed by the people, for the people.
My parents were children of the Great Depression. So they instilled in me how to be
financially solid and survive. Now, at 78, I
am learning everything that I hold dear is to
be attacked by the 47th President using a
contributor to his reelection as his adviser
and the leader of a group named DOGE.
I do not feel safe, due to cuts in so many
that have kept us safe—cuts in the CDC; cuts
in the FBI; cuts in the EPA; cuts in the FAA
and Social Security.
I worry about losing our foreign allies and
the release of convicted domestic terrorists
pardoned by the President while suspected
immigrants might be whisked away before
anyone even knows they are.
Everyone I know receiving Social Security
benefits relies on those payments for their
daily life. As prices increase under President
Trump’s leadership, many are not as fortunate as me who had a solid plan for increased
expenses. We worked, putting into FICA with
every paycheck that we received.
The thought of delaying payments or making errors so that anyone must prove their
right to receive their benefit is stealing from
people. Are we still the land of the free and
the home of the brave? I am counting on our
elected officials like you and the courts to
preserve it.
Lisa Bogacki, Fleetwood, PA:
Hello. My name is Lisa. I live in
Fleetwood, PA. 15 years ago, my healthy 42-
year-old husband was found deceased on our
couch by our then-13-year-old son. Our 10-
year-old and 3-year-old stood quietly crying
on the stairs.
Sudden cardiac death was the cause. The
same day, my daughter asked if we would
need to move to another house. I promised
her—promised her—that I would do everything I could to keep them in the only home
they had ever known. Those early days remain blurred in my mind.
I remember my father taking me to the Social Security office, and shortly thereafter,
survivor’s benefits for my children began
showing up in the bank account to assist
with their care. If not for these benefits, I
would not have been able to keep my promise to my children.
It is not much money, amounting to
roughly the salary of a minimum-wage job.
Yet it was a lifeline to some piece of normalcy for my family, not a Ponzi scheme.
My kids have now aged out of the system.
I am about to begin widow’s benefits as my
body cannot continue multiple jobs as a
physical therapist, which I needed to do to
make ends meet for myself and family.
Social Security benefits were essential to
the care and being of raising my children. It
was a promise from their father who had
paid into the system his entire working life.
We must work on continuing to expand these
essential benefits and never consider dismantling or privatizing them.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.068 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1965
Thank you, Senator Booker.
Here is Kayanna Spooner from Chippewa Falls, WI, who writes me:
My name is Kayanna Spooner, and I live in
Chippewa Falls, WI. I am 63 years old. My
husband Joe and I have five children and
three grandchildren and live a wonderful life
as our family is growing.
God bless you and your family.
We own businesses and work to contribute
Social Security for ourselves and our employees. We did all the things we could do to
secure our future and contribute to the larger community of those in need.
We felt that we were living the American
dream until one day in 2012—
I know this personally—my dad. I
feel for you, Ms. Spooner—
until one day in 2012, I was diagnosed with
Parkinson’s disease. Parkinson’s disease is a
degenerative brain disease that progresses
over time.
Sorry. I am thinking about my dad.
It is unrelenting and affects motor and
nerve processes.
Loss of benefits will have a direct and
daily effect on me and my family as we navigate the medical needs we will be facing. I
will need comprehensive care as I age. I will
need medication every single day of my life,
and I will need the security of a generous society to care for me.
Millions of others join me there. Please,
Senator Booker, please protect my Social
Security.
I just thank God that my mom had
the resources to take care of my dad,
and I watched that degenerative disease take from his life 20 years and how
much it cost—the thousands of dollars
it cost my mom to take care of him.
I know my friend ANDY KIM, who is in
the Senate right now, is facing health
challenges with his father. I know so
many people personally whose parents
have Alzheimer’s. I know so many
Americans who are not powerful. They
are not rich. I know so many Americans who live in fear every day that
one little thing will happen to them
that will destabilize their financial
well-being. And now those millions of
Americans, because a President and a
man named Musk are striking fear into
them, are whacking away the people
that answer phones, are firing the people in an Agency that already was
struggling with wait times, already
was struggling with slow response
times—these people who are hanging
on by a thread in their lives or are facing the people they love the most who
are struggling with the diseases that so
many of us in this body have been affected by, they are now worried. They
are writing me letters with words like
‘‘fear’’ and ‘‘terror.’’ They are talking
about staying up at night and not
being able to sleep because they don’t
have a President who comforts them.
They have a President who talks down
to them, who lies about the services
that they rely on.
What is this? It is not normal. It is
not normal. This is America. How can
the most powerful people in our land
not comfort others, not tell them they
have nothing to fear, but fear itself?
Not tell them to have malice toward
none but have charity toward all?
What kind of man is in our White
House that makes fun of the disabled,
who lies so much that the fact-checkers lose count, who minimizes the pain
and the suffering? We have Cabinet
Secretaries who say—the billionaires
themselves who say: If my mom misses
a Social Security check, ah. But if
somebody else complains about it, they
are probably a fraudster.
These people are not fraudsters. They
are hurting. They are afraid. They are
worried. For God’s sake, this is America.
Every one of our Founders’ documents is riddled with words that speak
to our commitment to each other.
Yeah, they were imperfect geniuses,
but they were people that aspired to
virtue. They read the greatest philosophers of their times. They said: What
does it mean to be good to one another? What does it mean to create a
society that is not run by despots and
dictators who are so disconnected, who
talk down, ‘‘let them eat cake’’?
They dreamed of a different country
than this, folks. They dreamed of a different country than this. They
dreamed of a country that stood for
not just ‘‘get all I can for me,’’ the biggest tax cuts possible to the wealthiest
people. They dreamed of a nation
where any child born in any circumstance from any place could grow
up and have their American dream.
And God, it gut-wrenches me when I
hear people not as privileged as me—
and I am not Musk and DOGE—but my
mom had the resources and the family
to support her as she watched my dad
die of Parkinson’s disease. But this
person who is writing in, she herself
has Parkinson’s. She underlines and
bolds the part of her letter. She says—
and I will read it again because, Ms.
Spooner, I want you—from Chippewa
Falls, WI—to know you are seen, to
know you are heard, to know that
maybe the President will talk down
and cut and malign your only paycheck, your only hope, but I won’t. I
won’t.
I see you. I feel you. You can’t lead
the people if you can’t love the people.
And I am sorry our President is not
showing that. He may be saying those
words.
She writes, with Parkinson’s—I still
remember my dad telling me he had it.
She writes about Parkinson’s:
It is unrelenting. It affects my motor and
nerve processes. Loss of benefits will have a
direct and daily effect on me and my family
as we navigate the medical needs we are
going to be facing. I will need progressive
and comprehensive care as I age. I will need
medication every single day of my life.
I know this. I know you will.
I will need the security of a generous society to care for me.
A generous society to do the basic for
families in this kind of struggle.
Millions of others join me there. Protect
my Social Security, Senator Booker.
I tell you, I am going to fight for
your Social Security. I am going to
fight to protect the Agency. I am going
to fight against unnecessary cuts that
hurt the service it gives. And today
into tomorrow, I am going to stand as
long as I can. As long as I can, I am
going to stand and read stories like
this because you are seen; you are
heard. Your voices are more important
than any of the 100 of us.
More of your stories should be told
on this floor. People that are scared
right now, terrified right now, people
living in rural areas that see their
local Social Security Agency on a list
that Elon Musk made of places he is
going to sell away to the private sector, and you are going to lose your
Agencies. Well, I will fight.
I am sorry.
Margaret Hebring from Chippewa
Falls, WI. Chippewa Falls, two letters,
my staff is keeping me on my toes.
This is another person from Chippewa
Falls, WI.
My name is Margaret Hebring, and I live in
Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin. I am 77 years old,
and I am a member of the Lac Courte
Oreilles band of the Lake Superior Ojibwe.
My husband is a veteran and who is currently—
I am sorry, so sorry.
My husband is a veteran who currently has
cancer, and he is receiving chemotherapy at
the VA hospital, which we have to travel to,
which is over 100 miles away. And without
our Social Security, I am not sure what
would happen to us.
We would, for sure, have to sell our home.
I have savings that will last me one month.
I have savings that will last me one month
right now. We live paycheck to paycheck. So
please, please protect our Social Security.
This is Judith Brown. We are moving
away from the great State of Wisconsin. We are going to the great State
of North Carolina, where my dad is
from, up in Hendersonville—no, Asheville. But this person, Judith Brown, is
from Charlotte, NC, one of my top five
favorite non-New Jersey States.
I don’t know if my friend ANDY KIM
has his top five favorite non-New Jersey States. New Jersey is obviously the
best. Don’t look at the Senator from
Connecticut, and I hate to tell him
that Connecticut is not on my top five
non-New Jersey States, even though I
got educated—
Mr. MURPHY. You lived in Connecticut.
Mr. BOOKER. I am sorry about that.
I am sorry about that. The Presiding
Officer is such a good man. His State is
not on my top five non-New Jersey
States, but North Carolina is. And I am
going to read a letter from Judith
Brown.
My name is Judith Brown. I live in Charlotte, North Carolina. I was 17 when I started
working and worked for another 20 years as
an administrator until I had to be declared
disabled. Without disability, I would not
have been able to see my specialist, get eye
care, or any of the other needs that I had. I
was also the mother of two young sons who
are on the autism spectrum. Without disability, I wouldn’t have been able to take
care of them and get the care they needed to
be independent young men.
God bless them.
I hear that they want to close the field offices and change the customer service line.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.070 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1966 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
As a person with mobility and vision impairments, this is outrageous. I need to be able
to access it the best way I can on the times
that I can access it. Please, Senator, fight to
protect Social Security for a senior like me
and for young people with disabilities like
my son. Thank you.
No, thank you, Judith Brown. Thank
you for writing a letter. Thank you for
speaking up. Thank you for not being
silent. Thank you for advocating, not
just for your family but for the millions and millions of other Americans
who lean heavily not just on their Social Security checks but on the incredible public servants that keep that
Agency working and who wish to have
a President that said: I am going to
bring the best of business experience to
my customer service. I am going to
bring the best of caring and technology
and innovation. I am going to call the
best computer technologist scientists
in the country. We are going to make
this the best Social Security in the history of our country.
And you know what, my friends, the
billionaires I had on stage with me
when I was inaugurated, I am just
going to ask them to pay a little bit
more, .00001 percent more of their net
worth to make sure Social Security is
safe forever.
I am sorry. It is crazy. I am going
back to Pennsylvania. I mean, it is almost like you can’t make this up, honestly. I just know my country. I know
our character. I know how good of a
people we are. I know how much we
love one another. I know our faith in
red States and blue States and right
and left.
I have sat next to people on planes
who introduced themselves to me as
Republicans from a red State, and by
the end, we are laughing and talking
and sharing stories. We are a good nation. Together, we can be so great and
show them that.
But how can we have a President
that in 71 days drives this much fear
into our country? It is absurd, everybody. It is absurd. This is why I can’t
let this be normal anymore.
Michelle from Lancaster, PA:
My name is Michelle Gruver—
I love your last name, Michelle—
from Lancaster, PA, and I would definitely
be impacted if something would happen to
my Social Security—
Michelle also has Parkinson’s—
and I am on disability, and the money that
I have goes pretty much to most of my medications and foods that I need to eat to keep
myself going and strong. That is how it
would impact my family. I wouldn’t be able
to afford also my insulin for my diabetes.
Parkinson’s and diabetes.
So it is a challenge every month as it is
even with the amount that we have because
of the cost of pharmaceuticals and things to
keep us going.
Yes.
So that is why Social Security is really
important to us as a family. It helps us get
by every day. Thank you.
This is Patricia Heaney Porter from
Johnstown, PA:
My name is Patricia Heaney Porter. I reside in Johnstown, Pennsylvania. My work is
varied. I have been employed as a secretary
in the private sector, as a statistician for a
government agency, as a real estate agent,
and most recently as a legal secretary. This
is my story of how Social Security has affected my life. My mother passed away in
1956. My sisters and I—
God bless you—
were 8, 10, and 11.
My maternal grandparents stepped in, and
they raised us with the help of Social Security survivor benefits, resulting in good education and other needs to be met. We had almost normal lives due to these benefits.
While raising two children, I worked as a
real estate agent. My income was based on
commissions rather than salary, so I made
entire Social Security payments based on
my income. We had a roof over our heads,
healthy food on the table. One of my children had serious medical issues. And I paid
for her bills out of pocket, never asking for
a penny from any government agency. These
expenses were paid for from my income, and
I paid taxes every year.
I waited until I was 70 to collect my Social
Security benefits as I realized the later you
collect, the better the benefits. I have no
pension, and I live almost entirely on Social
Security benefits. I am always looking for
part-time work, but few people want to hire
me as I will be 80 in June.
God bless you, God bless you.
Based on the benefits I receive, I am able
to pay my mortgage and all monthly expenses. I receive Medicare which helps pay
the medical bills.
Should Social Security and Medicare be
taken from me, I will likely lose my home. I
could no longer afford medical costs, groceries. I have a medical condition which requires regular visits with a specialist who is
70 miles away. Without Social Security and
Medicare, I would no longer be able to see
him, and my condition would result in death
sooner rather than later.
Thank you for all you are doing to see that
the benefits received from Social Security,
Medicare and Medicaid will continue.
Senator MURPHY and I were talking.
It is all interrelated, right? This is
somebody on Social Security, but they
have to drive for medical attention. We
are in a hospital crisis in America.
There are so many rural areas where
rural residents of our country have to
drive so far just to get to a hospital.
And cuts in Medicaid, we heard it
from the letters I read in the last section, will endanger those hospitals’
survival.
Charlotte, NC, again, Kevin Woodson.
I get a lot of letters, my staff, from
Wisconsin and Charlotte, NC. OK.
My name is Kevin Woodson. I am a 69-yearold retiree living in Charlotte, North Carolina. I worked 38 years for two Fortune 50
companies, and I thought that I would have
a fully funded pension plan to live off of in
my retirement. However, I never got to 25
years in, so only got partial pensions.
This is why I need Social Security. It covers the holes the pensions don’t cover in
terms of medical benefits. It allows me the
freedom to enjoy my life, take care of activities that I need in order to keep myself
healthy. Social Security is dependable,
something I rely on—
Not a Ponzi scheme—
and I hope that we don’t touch Social Security and we don’t have any issues trying to
keep that money flowing. It is money I paid
into.
Margaret Silva from Surprise, AZ. I
love that name. Surprise, AZ.
Hello, my name is Margaret Silva. I live in
Surprise, Arizona, with my husband. I started working at the age of 15 doing volunteer
work as a candy striper at the hospital where
my mother worked. I did not get paid. After
that, I started working as a waitress earning
.50 cents an hour. After graduating from high
school, I took various jobs earning a little
more, and then I started working at Mountain Bell, and I retired after 30 years from
Qwest. So if they do Social Security cuts, I
don’t know what I am going to do.
I will be forced at the age of 74 to look for
a job. So those are my hard-earned benefits,
I worked for that. More than 30 years I
worked for that. Thank you.
Wayne Behnke from Chippewa Falls,
WI. I need to go to Chippewa Falls, WI.
This is the third letter you guys are
having me read, including people
reaching out to me from Chippewa
Falls. God bless you. I need to visit
your community.
Hello, I am Wayne from Chippewa Falls.
Soon to be 69 years old. I have been on Social
Security for a couple years, my wife and I. I
spent years in the service, Navy, and, again,
like I said, my wife and I are going to have
been on Social Security. Saying that, we
would, if we lost our Social Security tomorrow, we would lose our house, our cars, and
pretty much our livelihood because this is
what we have worked for, and we don’t need
to lose it.
Why do you work for 55 years and pay into
Social Security and then lose it? Recently, I
tried to get back online and get on my Social
Security account. I wasn’t able to. Because
of that, I went down to the Social Security
office in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, and they said
they couldn’t do anything for me that I had
to set up an appointment. So I come home
later, called, set up an appointment, and it is
still three days out before I can get my appointment. And they don’t know if they can
help me. So at this point in time, I really
need to know what is going on with Social
Security, Senator Booker, because if we lose
it, everybody else that is on it loses it. We
are going to be in a really sorry state.
Those folks who answer phones and
set appointments, they are sure important. When somebody is in crisis, they
have to wait a few days, their check is
missed, and it is real consequences for
real people.
Hello, my name is Manuel. My wife and I
live—
Surprise, surprise—
in Surprise, Arizona. We are both on Social
Security. That is what we depend on to live
our lives in our retirement years. We have to
pay our bills, we have to buy food, we basically have to live off of that. So if they take
our Social Security, what are we going to
live off? Are you going to take care of us?
You know, we are American citizens, and we
deserve, and we have paid into it, and we
have earned it. And it is not just something
given to us. So leave our Social Security
alone. Let us live our lives. Let us live our
lives out the way they should be. And we are
supposed to be in our golden years, so it is
important to us. It is important to all Americans out there that are seniors. Let us live
our lives. Thank you very much, Senator
Booker.
Patricia Naughton from Pittsburgh,
PA, I lift your voice.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.071 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1967
My name is Patricia Naughton, and I am
from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. I have been
paying into Social Security since I was 16
years old. I am currently 70 and have been
collecting Social Security for the last 5
years. Without Social Security, I wouldn’t be
able to pay my mortgage, utilities, food,
medicine, copays, and many other things. I
would not be able to survive without Social
Security. There is no reason that seniors
should be held hostage over Social Security.
This is our money, our money that we put
into the Social Security system for many
years. We deserve not to be threatened by
the loss. Thank you.
Kathleen Woverding, from Hanover,
PA.
Hello, my name is Kathleen Woverding,
and I currently live in Hanover, Pennsylvania. I am originally from New Jersey and
taught in the public school system for 29
years as a school librarian. When I retired, I
decided to move to Hanover, Pennsylvania—
Kathleen, you are missed in New Jersey—
and at the age of 62, I started collecting Social Security because of COVID. I needed the
extra stability that Social Security provides.
I no longer have to work a full-time job because of Social Security, although I do work
a part-time job and still pay into the system.
Social Security provides me with stability,
financial stability. It helps pay the bills, and
I really don’t have to worry about my finances because it is Social Security.
If Social Security is taken away, I will lose
everything I have worked for the last 60
years. I feel that Social Security is a godsend. Protect it, Senator Booker. Thank you.
Cynthia Marino from Pennsylvania:
My name is Cynthia Marino. I am a retired
registered nurse from Lancaster, PA. My
husband—
I am sorry, Cynthia.
My husband died in 1990, and two of my
children received survivor benefits for 8
years, during which time I was able to get
my bachelor’s degree in nursing and work
part-time. All three of my children went on
to get college degrees.
When I was 61 years old, I went on Social
Security disability, having a hip replacement. I was switched to regular Social Security when I turned 65. I now depend mostly
on Social Security for my husband and myself, with small pensions from both of our
jobs supplementing Social Security.
I am now able to live independently in a
handicap mobile home thanks to the money
from Social Security in the past and present.
It is much cheaper than Medicaid funds to
keep me in a nursing home. Thank you, Senator Booker. Protect it.
Thank you, Cynthia, for your story.
These are just some. These are just
some. I lift their voices. I lift their
voices with mine.
I want to go to the Detroit Free
Press, but before I read this article, I
know my Senator from New Jersey is
here. I am going to read this article,
and if he is interested in our sixth
hour, if he has a question, I will yield
for a question while retaining the floor.
But I am going to read this article, and
then we will go.
This is from the Detroit Free Press.
My mom was born in Detroit. I love the
city. My family owes it a lot. It is
where my grandfather went to find a
job on the assembly lines in Detroit,
building bombers during World War II.
It says:
Kathie Sherrill has been retired for about
10 years now and typically didn’t think twice
about whether she’d receive her Social Security payments on time.
For the first time ever, the 74-year-old
Troy retiree went online in March on the
very day that $2,800 was to hit her bank account through direct deposit. She suddenly
felt compelled to make absolutely certain
that her Social Security money was there
when it was supposed to be.
Sherrill and other retirees are on edge.
Big. Time. Call it Social Security insecurity.
‘‘I have never really worried about it as
much as I have this year,’’ Sherrill said. The
money, thankfully, was sitting in her account in March and she knew her checks and
payments for her ongoing bills would not
start bouncing.
‘‘I think anybody, future or current people
on Social Security, are definitely targeted,’’
she said. ‘‘It’s a worry that I’m sure everybody is having right now.’’
I know it because I heard from my
mom and her whole senior community.
Seniors are uncertain of what is next
for Social Security.
Since early February, AARP has seen nearly double the calls to its customer care line
at 888–687–2277 as more people began being
troubled about Social Security, and it has
shown no signs of abating, according to an
AARP spokesperson.
Since Feb. 1, AARP said it has been receiving more than 2,000 calls into its call center
per week on concerns relating to Social Security.
‘‘Social Security has never missed a payment and AARP and our tens of millions of
members are not going to stand by and let
that happen now,’’ said John Hishta, AARP
senior vice president of campaigns, in a
statement last week.
While those words sound reassuring, it’s
frankly not comforting to realize that seniors need to hear that their monthly Social
Security payments will arrive as usual. I
don’t imagine anyone had this one on their
bingo cards for March 2025.
This kind of worry and stress.
On social media, I spotted one comment
that said: ‘‘Folks, the federal workers began
advising last month that all Americans remove all funds from the account where they
normally receive any federal payments (Social Security, federal tax refunds and the
like). Keep the account but only use it as a
place for feds to transfer money. Immediately move all transferred cash to a separate account.’’
The concern, according to the post: ‘‘DOGE
can declare you dead and force your bank to
send back any funds paid to you.’’
Whoa, a lot of retirement angst there and,
yes, some wild notions and really bad advice.
Moving Social Security money around to
hide it in another account, different from
where it’s directly deposited, actually could
put more of your money at risk when it
comes to some debt collection.
Anyone who has tracked retirement policy,
as I have, knows that the potential unraveling of the Social Security system has been
discussed for decades. Many retirees just
never imagined a convoluted scenario where
someone would think Social Security, possibly, could implode in a few days.
The health of Social Security, which
marks its 90th anniversary this year, isn’t
all that makes many retirees and those
about to retire nervous. Their anxiety can go
into overdrive watching the stock market
slide on Trump tariff news—and seeing all
the political ping-pong with Social Security
money that belongs in their pockets.
The Trump administration has maintained
that it wants to cut costs and fraud when it
comes to the Social Security program, not
benefits. But people remain skeptical, and
some commentary isn’t helping.
Acting Social Security Commissioner Leland Dudek in interviews last week, including one with Bloomberg News last Thursday,
actually threatened to temporarily shut
down Social Security after a federal judge
temporarily stopped members of Elon
Musk’s Department of Government Efficiency from digging through personal data at
the Social Security Administration.
The DOGE operatives, according to the
court, will first need to receive proper training on handling sensitive information, which
some might say is the least they could do.
The American Federation of State, County
and Municipal Employees, or AFSCME, Alliance for Retired Americans, and the American Federation of Teachers filed a motion
for emergency relief on March 7 to halt
DOGE’s ‘‘unprecedented, unlawful seizure’’
of sensitive data regarding millions of Americans.
No surprise, Dudek soon found it politically prudent to back off from his threat.
‘‘I am not shutting down the agency,’’
Dudek said in a statement, indicating he had
received clarifying guidance from the court
about the temporary restraining order.
President Trump supports keeping Social
Security offices open and getting the right
check to the right person at the right time,’’
[Dudek said].
Financial tech CEO Frank Bisignano, who
was nominated by President Donald Trump
to lead the Social Security Administration,
ended up being grilled by Democrats about
the bedlam during confirmation hearings before the Senate Finance Committee on Tuesday.
The angst isn’t about to go away, particularly if people continue to face even longer
waits on the phones or see Social Security
offices closing in their communities, thanks
to some key changes being made now [by
Trump’s administration].
Customer service is on the chopping block,
as the Social Security Administration reduces the number of employees, restricts
what services can be handled by phone and
shutters some local offices where people
could talk to someone face-to-face.
On Wednesday, the Social Security Administration announced that it would initiate a
two-week delay for implementing a highly
criticized move to end phone services and require in-person visits for some services.
‘‘In-person identity proofing for people unable to use their personal ‘my Social Security’ account for certain services will be effective April 14,’’ according to the announcement.
But individuals applying for Medicare, disability and Supplemental Security Income
who cannot use a personal ‘‘my Social Security’’ account can complete their claim entirely over the telephone without the need to
come into an office, according to the March
26 announcement. That’s good news for
many.
Even so, merely delaying the change
doesn’t help others and, frankly, customer
service could still suffer longer term.
And it will get very ugly if current Social
Security recipients miss out on even one
dime of their benefits.
At one point last week, U.S. Commerce
Secretary Howard Lutnick suggested that
his 94-year-old mother-in-law wouldn’t complain about missing a Social Security check
for a month or so. Only fraudsters would
call, he said during an ‘‘All-In’’ podcast.
My thought: Have you ever watched an exchange where someone on Social Security is
being denied a coupon or a senior discount at
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.073 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1968 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
a store or restaurant? It is not pretty. Worse
yet, has Lutnick ever talked with a friend or
relative in his or her 70s or 80s who depends
on Social Security to cover basic bills?
Social Security provides retirement, survivor and disability payments to 73 million
people each month. That number includes
about 56 million people who are age 65 or
older.
Some people—and even Sherrill includes
herself in that group—are better off than
others. They won’t miss paying an electric
bill or the rent because they can turn to retirement savings or money from a traditional pension. Even so, Social Security remains an integral source of income each
month for all retirees and others who receive
benefits.
‘‘I’m concerned about my financial future,’’ Sherrill told me.
Social Security now represents about half
of her monthly income.
She never imagined that any Social Security fix would involve cutting benefits for existing retirees. . . . Some GOP proposals
have suggested increasing the age for full retirement benefits from 67 to 69 over an eightyear period beginning in 2026.
But she now fears that it’s possible her
benefits could get cut at some point down
the road.
Overall, Sherrill has had fun in retirement.
She has nine grandchildren and 12 greatgrandchildren and wants to spend more time
with them, not less.
Sherrill and her friends who are retired are
cutting back on eating out and entertainment, just in case something happens to Social Security. Higher prices for many things
put pressure on fixed incomes, too.
She wants to take less money out of her retirement savings now, so she has more
money sitting on the sidelines in case her
Social Security benefits are cut in the future.
Even so, she’s staring at an unexpected
$600 new monthly car payment ahead because she needs to replace a car that was in
an accident a few weeks ago.
If her Social Security payments are cut or
stopped . . . ‘‘I may be selling it.’’
The wild swings for the stock market—and
401(k) plans—only created more jitters.
The economy seems uncertain. Consumer confidence is in worse of a place.
Leaders are threatening Social Security services. Offices are being cut.
People are being laid off. So people are
worrying.
Taking a rough guess, she estimates that
she has lost about $30,000 on her retirement
investments as the stock market tumbled in
early 2025.
Over the years, she said, cuts to Social Security were always part of the political
realm. But she felt that Congress provided a
stopgap to any drastic moves. And she
doesn’t believe that’s true anymore.
‘‘I’m hoping that Congress wakes up, looks
in the mirror and decides they don’t like
what they see,’’ she told me.
One big problem with fueling an atmosphere of chaos is that many people do start
worrying about everything, including the
possibility that Social Security isn’t a system that they can depend on anymore.
Sherrill said she just took a call from her
college roommate who mentioned that she
was going to look at her bank account online
to see whether her monthly Social Security
payment was stopped or had arrived as
usual.
‘‘I said, ‘You’re OK. I got [mine] this
month.’’’
So many people are afraid right now.
Mr. KIM. Will the Senator yield for a
question?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I will yield for a
question while retaining the floor.
Mr. KIM. Thank you, Senator BOOKER, and thank you for coming to the
floor tonight and speaking up. I have a
few questions for you. So why don’t
you catch your breath.
I wanted to start by saying how
proud I am of you to represent our
great State of New Jersey, alongside
each other. And it is not just me. I
want to tell you—because I know you
have been here in this Chamber nonstop for hours—but I want to tell you
that people are paying attention, and
they join me in thanking you in this
moment. In fact, I saw a few posts I
thought I would share.
Stacy from Bayonne said on
Facebook:
I couldn’t be prouder to be a life-long New
Jerseyan than I am tonight. Keep it up. Get
in that good trouble. Lead the way and hopefully others will follow.
Janie in Princeton said:
Thank you. Proud that you are my Senator
and that you are bringing ‘‘Big Jersey energy’’ to DC tonight.
Vicki in Ewing said:
We are sending our strength to you. Medicare and Medicaid should not be touched.
And someone on Reddit even said:
I hope he wore the most comfortable and
supportive shoes he could find.
In your opening, you said something
that resonated with me. You said:
Our constituents are asking us to acknowledge that this is not normal, that this is a
crisis.
I can’t tell you how important it is
to internalize it. That is why we are
here at this late hour in the U.S. Senate. That is why you are leading here
to make the case to the American people that this is a crisis. That resonated
with me because I hear this over and
over again. I hear it from people all
over our home State, whether at townhalls or other rooms that are packed
with people saying this moment is not
normal; this moment constitutes a crisis. I am glad you are speaking on the
floor and said that because what you
said isn’t just CORY BOOKER saying
that; it is that millions of New
Jerseyans we represent are saying it.
And you are lifting up their voice. It is
not just you are saying that; it is that
millions of Americans who see something fundamentally wrong, and they
are angry about it.
I have some questions for my colleague. But I want to add some context
for this because I want to dig in a bit
on why people are so angry at this moment and why what with we are seeing
from Donald Trump and Elon Musk
isn’t in response to that anger; it is the
cause of it.
A common refrain in the townhalls
that I held are that people feel like
nothing is working for them. There is a
promise, a uniquely American promise
that is simply going unfulfilled for too
many. That promise is simple: Your
government will work for you; your
economy will allow you to advance if
you work hard and give your kids a
better future; and your country will
keep you safe by ensuring the world is
stable and secure.
Senator, you and I are here because
we know that this promise is going
unfulfilled. To say that the American
promise is going unfulfilled would be a
tragedy in its own right. It would be
something that we as a Congress
should put our entire focus into restoring. But the sad fact is that this isn’t
just about a promise unfulfilled; it is
about a promise that has been hijacked. It is about a promise that has
been distorted to work for those who
have been paid to play to be denied for
everyone else.
Let’s start with the promise that
your government will work for you.
This is the basis of our democratic Republic. We are public servants in that
we serve the people. It is the people’s
priorities that we put first. It is their
lives that we work to make better
every day. It is their futures that we
are endeavoring to brighten.
But when the people look at Donald
Trump and his administration, they
don’t see that. They see Elon Musk
who donated nearly $300 million to buy
his way into a seat in power. The
world’s richest man has been handed
the keys to our government. And the
same person who has been handed nearly $40 billion in your taxpayer dollars
to prop up his corporations is now
working to fire veterans from their
jobs, make the Social Security Administration less responsive to seniors, and
make it harder for your government to
work for you. That is what we have
seen in the collection of billionaires
that buy their way to fulfill their own
American promise—a government that
works for them and only them; a government that keeps them rich and at a
cost to your Medicaid, to your Social
Security, to the food you put on the
table; government where they pay and
they benefit and if you can’t, you are
left behind.
That is not the government our parents were promised. That is not the
government we were promised. That is
not the government we want to pass
down to our kids.
As Senator BOOKER mentioned, our
Nation is in crisis. Bedrock commitments are being broken. That starts
with the first American promise. We
can rebuild and restore that promise by
actually working to make our government work for the people. Where we see
corruption, we must call it out and
combat it. And the corrupting power of
money in our politics is one example.
And the extreme wealth of billionaires
like Elon Musk is drowning out working Americans, and that must be addressed.
And as we approach the 250th anniversary of the independence of our
country, we have an opportunity to remind people that the promise of America is something bigger than ourselves.
And that public service, not private enrichment for those at the very top but
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.075 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1969
public service is core to what makes
this country special.
So let’s talk about that second American promise. This is the promise of the
American dream, that Rockwellian notion of the house and the white picket
fence and the kids in the yard only
works if you can pay for that house. It
only works if you can afford childcare
and healthcare for those kids. It only
works if you can work hard and deliver
something bigger and better than you
are handed. And right now, that is not
happening.
While we are fighting to bring change
to our economy to make life more affordable and the middle class more accessible, what we are seeing from Donald Trump and Elon Musk is another
promise hijacked for those at the very
top.
Senator BOOKER, I want to just take
a step back as I get into these questions here because you are talking
about Social Security, talking about
Medicaid, talking about so many of
these other issues here. But in that
broader context, what we have situated
here is the recognition that we live in
the time of the greatest inequality in
our Nation’s history.
So it isn’t just about these programs
and how we rely on them, it is that we
are seeing the wealth gap widening,
and it is happening faster and faster.
In many ways, I consider this to be
the great fragility of America right
now. We are the greatest, richest, most
powerful country in the world but not
for everybody. And what we see right
now, it is not just about Social Security; it is not just about the checks,
but as you mentioned, Social Security
offices are closing, worry about customer service, people call on the phone
lines. And it feels like efforts are on
the way to try to sabotage our Social
Security, our Medicare, our Medicaid,
and then have people say: Hey, look, it
is not working, and that is why we
need to get rid of these things.
And that sabotage is something people see right before their very eyes. I
mean, you heard the Commerce Secretary talk about how seniors won’t
mind if there are late payments. He
said those that complain are
fraudsters, as you mentioned. That is
directly trying to undermine people
who are working hard over the course
of their lives.
I have to say, it is a great irony in
many ways, this idea that the richest
man in the world is criticizing the
hard-earned savings of seniors that are
just getting a little bit every single
month for them to just try to get by,
and then he calls it a Ponzi scheme.
My father, as you mentioned, is one
of those that depends on Social Security for his entire livelihood right now.
I heard another person at a townhall
describe the feeling that she has right
now, and I think you can connect with
it. She says it feels hard to breathe
right now because there is so much
anxiety in the American people. I am
glad you are shining a light on this because people are scared and they are
worried and they want to know what
comes next.
My question to you here is something
that was actually shared by a constituent of both of ours talking about
all the concerns of Social Security of
this time.
But I thought it was very poignant in
pointing out that what we also need to
put forward to the American people
right now is a vision going forward of
how to not just restore and protect this
promise but how we take it to the next
step. If we live in a time of the greatest
amount of inequality, not just to think
about how we hold on to a receding
tide but how to try to put forward
some vision that can try to inspire the
same way that Social Security did and
put forward generational change—I
wanted to ask you that sense.
Do you believe in that sense that
right now, more than ever, as people
are faced with this anxiety that is hard
to breathe, that, yes, we will stand
here on the floor of the Senate and do
everything we humanly can to be able
to protect what they have. But do you
agree that we also have to put forward
that positive vision of where do we
take Social Security, where do we take
Medicaid, Medicare; where do we take
our economy to better work for everybody so we are not just trying to figure
out how to better divide and hold on to
the pennies that the billionaires are
willing to share with the rest of us
while they don’t give us anything else
to be able to move forward on.
And how do we come up with a vision
that tries to shrink that inequality and
live in a society that is willing to share
that wealth and recognize there is
more than enough to go around? And
that is not zero-sum and that we can be
stronger together in that way.
I would love to hear how you can
paint that vision for the American people.
Mr. BOOKER. I will answer your
question. But knowing that my mom is
watching right now, before I answer
the question, I want to tell the folks
who may not know about the relationship with my other Senator from New
Jersey—it is probably one of the more
interesting relationships in here.
I always tell New Jerseyans, I voted
for ANDY KIM before anybody else did
because I was on an interview committee for the Rhodes Scholarship in
New Jersey. I was a former Rhodes, and
I really wanted the experience of what
it was like to be on the other side because my experience was quite interesting.
These incredible folks came in,
young people from New Jersey who
were amazing, applying for this extremely competitive scholarship. ANDY
KIM was one among that number, and
he blew the committee away. So way
back—I am going to retain the floor
but ask you a question. What year was
that?
Mr. KIM. That would have been 2004.
Twenty-one years.
Mr. BOOKER. How many years?
Mr. KIM. Twenty-one.
Mr. BOOKER. Twenty-one years ago.
In 2002, I lost a run for mayor and in
2006, I ran again. I was in between trying to do my work in Newark.
ANDY blew me away. I knew then
that he was this extraordinary man of
character and brilliance, this great mix
of heart and head, this great mix of
honor, and a fierce ambition to make a
contribution to the world. And if you
follow ANDY’s career, he has been a
public servant in some of the highest
levels of the administration.
But then he ran for Congress, and I
remember that race. You electrified,
not just the district you represented
but really the whole State of New Jersey. And then he came here.
But the moment that I remember
most was during the January 6 attack.
I was here on the Senate floor in this
very seat. I will never forget how back
here, MARK KELLY, an unbelievable
Senator—he and I were two of the last
people off the floor, along with one of
our Republican colleagues, trying to
make sure if anybody broke through
we would be there. I can’t believe as a
Senator I was thinking how to fight
my way off the Senate floor.
But I remember we got to an undisclosed location. A lot of Senators were
in safe spots, a lot of House Members
were in safe spots debating about what
to do. I am so happy we came back late
and continued the business of government, transfer of power.
While all these Senators were dealing
with big issues, whatever, ANDY KIM
took a broom, plastic bags, and began
cleaning up under the Capitol dome—
remarkable humility shown in a humble gesture about his love of country.
Now, here we stand on the Senate
floor at the earliest hours of the morning, closing in on 2 a.m. You asked me
this question I didn’t expect which is:
Hey, CORY, this now seems to be a time
where Democrats are finding themselves about what they are against;
shouldn’t we be talking about a vision
of what we are for? I am very upset
watching what is happening to Social
Security, watching what is happening
to insinuate fear amongst seniors who
should be retiring with security and
peace, cuts undermining thousands of
people being laid off—all of that is worthy of us standing here and the things
we are reading.
But what I think Senator KIM is really pointing to is the fact that there are
bold visions for whom we are going to
be as a country. He is one of these big
believers that we can be a nation that
boasts about we are a country where
somebody doesn’t retire and lives on
such a meager check that they are
technically at the poverty line. ‘‘Senator BOOKER, we have more wealth
than nations all around the globe—
stratospheric wealth in this country,
GDP growth, and can’t we design a system that doesn’t have seniors stressed
out and living—those that live off of
their paychecks—living there?’’
VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:02 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.076 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1970 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
The other thing I know you know
about—and I recently did a talk with a
Republican friend of mine, Senator
YOUNG—we worked on a bill together
because we both recognize we are in a
grip with seniors—that generation,
baby boomers, a generation ahead of
me—I almost said us, but you are technically a millennial.
Mr. KIM. That is right.
Mr. BOOKER. I am an Xer. But the
generation ahead of me is so big that
we are seeing this massive group of
Americans, soon to be retiring, and
lots of people recognize it, calling it
the ‘‘great retirement crisis,’’ not because Social Security checks won’t be
there. You were asking me: CORY, what
is the great vision for them to be
there? But because just the reality
that the Social Security checks themselves are so meager, and many other
people don’t have jobs where they have
401(k)s and the like. Senator YOUNG—
again, this is not a partisan speech.
Later, I will be quoting from the
Cato Institute, the Wall Street Journal, where there are lots of conservatives who point to this not being a
normal time in America; this being a
crisis moment in America, not just
people on my side of the aisle but Republican Governors, Republican
thought leaders—a lot of folks are saying there is a real crisis in our country
being caused by the current President,
who, in 71 days, most people can’t say
yes; most people say no to the question, Are you better off than you were
71 days ago?
So I want to answer your question by
saying this: Everyone should retire
with a secure Social Security. I believe
there are ways to secure the programs
by asking the wealthiest people who
pay the smallest percentage of their income into Social Security to pay a little bit more in Social Security taxes on
their income, which is minuscule. As
you said, there is a gravity of wealth
that is being created in this country,
which is, again, something I am not
against in terms of just being successful. But this idea that we have a system that creates a fair retirement is
one thing we can do.
I think, also, one of these things we
should be talking about right now is
how do we make the Social Security
system not frustrating for people who
complained before Donald Trump laid
off tens of thousands of people with
Musk, who complained about wait
times, and other things. There are
ways we can improve Social Security
services as well.
So I think we can do things to secure
Social Security in the long term with a
simple fix, not by raising the retirement age for people who are struggling
but by doing things by simply saying:
Do you know what? Social Security
taxes are already regressive because
they cap out at a certain amount.
Maybe skip some of the people in the
middle, under $400,000 or $500,000 a year,
and make people who are the wealthiest in the country pay a little bit more.
That would be my vision. A very small
amount would create a secure system.
I think we can also do a lot to improve
the Social Security services.
Then what I did with Senator
YOUNG—this is what is special about
this place when it happens. It is for
people to reimagine what economic security could be about. I am now very
quietly—I think I have told you about
this. I have this great idea that I have
been talking about for years called
baby bonds, or that every child born in
America—and this is not a new idea.
We actually scraped it from people
years and years ago on both sides of
the aisle in here, who had this idea
that why not in a capitalist society
have every child be born with a savings
account—excuse me—a growth account. The government seeds it with
some money, and through their entire
lives, people can contribute into that
tax-free, and it can grow, so that by
the time—not by retirement—but by
the time they are 20, 25, 30, they have
thousands, if not tens of thousands, of
dollars to invest in things that create
wealth, because, right now, lots of people are working paycheck to paycheck
and don’t have stock accounts or the
kinds of things that could actually
produce a lot more wealth.
I am just throwing that out as one
idea, ANDY. I am going to pause because I know you have another question, and I am going to yield to a question while retaining the floor. But I
just want to say there are so many bipartisan ideas with which to deal with
wealth inequality. I mean, the child
tax credit was, unfortunately, not
made permanent. It cut child poverty
in America in half. It worked for an entire year. I remember some of my colleagues, from Marco Rubio to Mitt
Romney, talking about: Hey, we should
be expanding the child tax credit. We
should be having a bolder vision for
America—for retirement security, for
wealth creation, for economic security.
But we are not talking about those
bold ideas.
We have a President who has come
in, and one of the first things he has
done in 71 days is insinuate fear and insecurity about Social Security by
threatening it, by creating and telling
lies about it, and by having somebody
like Elon Musk calling it a Ponzi
scheme. That is why we get fear. Then
they take a hatchet to the actual
Agency that undermines its ability to
deliver service in a good way.
Mr. KIM. Will the Senator yield?
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield to a question while retaining the floor.
Mr. KIM. What you raised is absolutely right, and it is front and center
in everyone’s mind.
You know, when my parents immigrated here 50 years ago, they didn’t
know anybody in the entire Western
Hemisphere of planet Earth. But America called them. It inspired them.
I asked them once: What was it that
drew you here?
And they said that they felt that,
here in America, they could guarantee
that the family that they raised, that
their kids—me and my sister—would
have a better life and more opportunities than they did, and that was the
sense of that generational progress
that is made.
But now, you know, I am standing
here with a 7-year-old and a 9-yearold—I am hoping fast asleep right
now—and I don’t know if I can make
that same promise to them right now,
that I can guarantee them that they
will have a better life and more opportunities.
So, you know, there is that growing
cynicism and pessimism about that
American promise I talked to you
about, and I just feel like there is an
unraveling happening here, where we
see this sense of concern, and it is
being weaponized by some who create
that sense of zero sum to push us away
from this idea that we are a part of
something bigger than all of us and
that we can all lift each other up in
that great American project.
It is sad because, as we were getting
to that 250th anniversary, you know, it
should be a time when we rededicate
ourselves to the American project—
right?—like recommit ourselves to
what the next 250 years will be. But we
are entering it now with a sense of pessimism on that front. So, you know, I
guess my question to you here is, how
do we break out of that tailspin on that
front?
Mr. BOOKER. So, ANDY, you have
gotten me really excited—
Mr. KIM. Yes.
Mr. BOOKER.—because I love that
you are a millennial. I am X generation. I love the baby boomers, but they
are quickly leaving Congress. This is
the last baby boomer President you
will ever have. I am confident of that.
And new generations are coming forward to lead in America.
It is time that we dream America
anew. It really is. It is time that we revive and redeem the dream. I just am
one of these people who thinks, like:
OK, guys, we have some of the brightest minds on the planet Earth. Some of
our Founding Fathers said we need a
little revolution every once in a while,
like we need new thoughts and new
ideas and new visions that energize
people, that take a lot of the old divisions in our country and erase them
and remind people we have common
cause and common purpose. I want to
get people excited again about the
American dream. I want to renew the
dream, to redeem the dream. We can do
that. I am so excited about it.
And on financial security, it is absurd that we don’t have the greatest
plan to create wealth, not for the favored few simply—again, the top quartile in America has crushed it over the
last 25 years. Under Obama alone, the
stock market doubled. But most Americans don’t own stocks. So people who
are sitting on passive wealth were able
to grow and grow and grow and grow,
while working Americans saw their
prices going up, housing becoming
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.077 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1971
unaffordable, and the idea of the American dream under assault.
It ticks me off that other countries
are trying to out-America us. They are
trying to take our secret sauce that we
seem to be turning our back on: affordable higher education, apprenticeship
programs. I mean, with some of our European competitors, a job just appears
before you, and you can go right into
an apprenticeship program where you
can earn and learn and end up in a career that gives you not just success but
that you thrive in.
There is no idea that we can’t conceive of as a country. This is an idea
and a time that I just think that we
need to start being bold again in our
visions for collective prosperity, for everyone to thrive—not just the favorite
few but the many. I am telling you
that those ideas are out there, whether
it is baby bonds or the child tax credit
or investing in science and research.
There are so many things.
But you are—can I say this to you affectionately? You are a nerd as am I.
We are two guys who love to read, who
love American history. We are two
guys in this body—go back a century.
They never imagined that we would be
here. OK?
One of my favorite speeches of all
time was when Daniel Webster got on
Bunker Hill, and he delivered a
speech—I am going to read the introduction to it—to commemorate the
50th anniversary of the Revolutionary
War battle at Bunker Hill, in which the
outnumbered colonists inflicted such
heavy losses on the mighty British
forces attempting to invade. I love one
of the quotes. I can’t remember it exactly, but the general—the person who
was leading the British attack—wrote
in their diary.
He wrote back to the King: We won
the battle, but a few more victories
like this and we are going to lose the
continent.
That is how great these people were,
and this is what I want you to know: It
is a new generation, right?
Mr. KIM. Yes.
Mr. BOOKER. Those leaders are no
longer around. I read this, and I get excited by the possibility for our generation and for the new leaders who are
emerging in America. They have to. It
is their obligation to not let the dream
die and to redeem the dream.
So here it is. I am just dying to read
this to you. Here it is, ANDY. I don’t
want to read too much of it to you.
OK. Here we go:
If in our case the representative system is
ultimately to fail, this idea of a democratic
government, popular governments must be
pronounced impossible.
He is saying:
We have an obligation to make a more perfect Union. No combination of circumstances
more favorable to this experiment can ever
be expected. The last hopes of mankind,
therefore, rest with us. Can we make this
democratic experiment work?
And it should be proclaimed that our example had become an argument for the experiment. The principle of free government
adheres to this American soil. It is bedded in
the soil. It is as movable as this Nation’s
mountains. And let the sacred obligations—
This is the part, Senator KIM.
And let the sacred obligations which have
devolved on this generation, and on us, sink
deep into our hearts [the sacred obligations].
Those are daily dropping from among us who
established our liberty and our government.
The generation that established this Nation
are now dying. The great trust now descends
to our hands. Let us apply ourselves to which
is presented to us as an appropriate object.
We can win no laurels in our generation in a
war for independence. Earlier and worthier
hands gathered [all of those laurels]. Nor are
there places for us by the sight of Solon and
Alfred and other founders of our state. Our
fathers have filled them. But there remains
to us a great duty of defense and preservation, and there is open to us also that noble
pursuit to which the spirit of the times
strongly invites us. Our proper business is
improvement. Let ours be the age of improvement. In a day of peace, let us advance
the arts of peace and the works of peace.
Let us develop the resources of our
lands, call forth its powers, build up its
institutions, promote all its greatness,
and see whether we also, in our day and
generation, may not perform something worthy to be remembered. Let us
cultivate a true spirit of union and harmony. In pursuing the great objects
which our condition points out to us,
let us act under a settled conviction,
and an habitual feeling, that these
twenty-four states are one country.
Let our conceptions be enlarged to the
circle of our duties. Let us extend our
ideas over the whole of the vast field in
which we are called to act. Let our object be our country, our whole country.
. . . And, by the blessings of God, may
that country itself become a vast and
splendid monument, not of oppression
and terror but of wisdom, peace, and
liberty upon which the world may gaze
with admiration for ever!
That is a bold vision—this bold vision
that doesn’t give up on America, that
doesn’t surrender to cynicism about
America. That is who you are, ANDY
KIM, and that is what gets me excited.
Right now, we are fighting against
what I think are tyrannical forces. I
am sorry. When a leader stands up not
with humility like in George Washington’s Farewell Address or like some of
the great Founders in their inaugural
addresses, but who stands up and says,
‘‘Only I can solve these problems,’’ but
who doesn’t use his speeches to heal
and to comfort but to talk about the
enemies he is going to pursue—and
those enemies are not the adversaries
who seek to destroy us but are the enemies who are other Americans—and to
create an environment where our seniors, who should be retiring in security,
are fearful that their Social Security
or their Medicaid or their Medicare is
going to be under threat, that is insidious to me.
This is an un-normal time. This is
why I am standing here. But you, my
friend, my partner in the Senate—God,
this partnership. I am so excited about
the future. I am so excited about the
promise. Let us fend off all attempts to
cut Social Security and Social Security services. Let us fend off all attempts to cut Medicaid and Medicaid
care and CHIP and all the other things
that we rely on.
But let us also not forget that our obligation is not to defend what it is but
to have a vision for what can become.
We now, when so many people are giving up on the American dream, on the
idea of America, on which you said so
wonderfully that my children will do
better than me—that basic bedrock
that our children, generation after generation, will do better and better and
better—it is time to redeem the dream
and dream America anew with bold visions. It is not how we will just help
people survive in retirement, but they
are visions of how we can all thrive in
this great Nation that has enough resource and enough abundance—abundance—to provide for everyone’s hopes
and dreams.
(Mr. MCCORMICK assumed the
Chair.)
Mr. KIM. Thank you so much. Keep
up your energy.
I yield the floor.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you. You have
given me energy. I am sourcing my energy from you.
I don’t want to just cast aspersions
on—and we are saying things that I
just want to back up in fact. All of
those letters—all of those letters from
seniors—I see my dear friend from
Pennsylvania is now the Presiding Officer. He missed all of the letters I read
from Pennsylvania. In all of those letters, people were using the words
‘‘Ponzi scheme.’’ Where did that come
from? I just want to read from ‘‘The
Joe Rogan Experience.’’ I actually
liked it. I enjoy listening to Joe Rogan.
Elon:
Social Security is the biggest Ponzi
scheme of all time.
Now, that is a big statement. It is the
biggest Ponzi scheme of all time, Elon
says.
And Joe Rogan says:
Why? Explain that.
Elon says:
Oh. So, well, people pay into Social Security, um . . . and—and the money goes out of
Social Security immediately. But the obligation for Social Security is . . . uh . . . your
entire retirement career. So you’re . . .
you’re paying . . . uh . . . with your, the
kind of people . . . you’re paying . . .
And I am reading this verbatim.
You’re paying . . . uh . . . with your, the
kind of people . . . you’re paying . . . like—
like—if you look at the future obligations of
Social Security, it far exceeds, uh, the—the
tax revenue—uh . . . far.
If you’ve looked at the debt, the debt
clock.
Rogan says:
Yes.
OK. There’s, there’s, there’s—
Three ‘‘there’s.’’ I am reading it verbatim—
our present-day debt, but then there’s our future obligation. So when you look at the future obligation of Social Security, um, uh,
the actual, uh, national debt is, like, double
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.079 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1972 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
what—what people think it is because of the
future obligations.
Rogan:
Uh.
Elon:
So, uh, basically, people are living way
longer than expected.
That was the evidence of a Ponzi
scheme.
Now, let’s correct something. The
reason why we have a massive debt in
America—lots of people should take
ownership over it. But the biggest debt
creator in the last, say, 25, 30 years, is
the President of the United States, the
current one, in his first term, by blowing massive holes in our deficits to give
tax cuts that went way disproportionately to the wealthiest Americans and
corporations. And he wants to renew
those tax cuts that independent budget
folks are saying could add trillions of
dollars to our national deficit.
So if he is talking about the debt
clock or whatever he is talking about,
he is part of an administration—even
though he is not elected and not approved by Congress and whatever, he
and his President—the richest man in
the world and the most powerful man
in the world—together they are driving
an agenda that is going to drive this
deficit much bigger. And they are
going to try to pay for some of it—not
all of it because it is trillions of dollars
of projected debt. They are going to try
to pay for some of it by cutting NIH
grants, by cutting Medicaid, by cutting
staff at Social Security.
So, no, Social Security is not a Ponzi
scheme. People paid into it. And as
ANDY KIM and I just talked, there are
ways to preserve it, strengthen it, and
make it better.
It is a program that pays benefits
after a lifetime of work. It has never
missed a payment. It has never run out
of money. It is an insurance program.
But don’t take my word. Here is Current Affairs magazine editor Nathan
Robinson writing on March 7: ‘‘Why
Social Security Is Not a Ponzi
Scheme.’’
That is a great title.
Old age insurance is not a scam, and it’s
not destined to collapse. Proponents of
privatizing or eliminating Social Security
are constantly telling lies about it.
Here is the article:
Elon Musk has called Social Security a
‘‘Ponzi scheme,’’ comparing it to a scam in
which a con man must keep finding new
suckers in order to disguise the financial
unsustainability of his enterprise. [The]
term has also been used by libertarian commentators at Reason and the Hoover Institute, who try to convince people that the
program is fundamentally broken and
unsustainable. Because both Social Security
and Ponzi schemes take money in from new
contributors which they pay to old ones, it is
easy to craft a superficial resemblance between [the two]. But Social Security is not a
Ponzi scheme, and it’s important to understand why, because the comparison is used to
generate the illusion of a Social Security
‘‘crisis’’ that can be used to justify major
benefit cuts or even the elimination of the
program altogether. [Under the Ponzi
scheme,] the differences between old age insurance and Ponzi schemes, we can train
ourselves mentally to resist the propaganda
that is used to try to convince the public to
support undermining one of our most important social welfare programs.
Let’s think about a few different cases in
which money is pooled and paid out. First,
let us imagine a company has a pension
scheme. (I realize this may be difficult to
imagine these days, but stick with me for a
minute.) Workers pay 5 percent of their income. The employer pays in an amount
equivalent to 15 percent of the worker’s income. When the worker retires, they get a
fixed benefit every year for the rest of their
life, equivalent to some percentage of what
their salary was. [Let’s call that] Scenario
A.
Now let us imagine a different scenario:
Five (uncommonly astute) middle schoolers
create a rudimentary insurance scheme to
guard against being punished by their parents. The children all go to the mall every
week to play arcade games together. They
each get an allowance of $10 per week, which
they spend at the arcade. What they decide
to do is spend $9 each week instead and put
$1 per week into a fund. If one of them has
their allowance taken away by their parents,
the fund will pay their arcade money for the
week. That way, nobody in the friend group
is ever deprived of the ability to go to the arcade. We are going to call [that] Scenario B.
Finally, let us imagine a scenario in which
a fraudster tricks a group of old people into
giving him their money. He says that if they
invest their retirement money with him, he
can guarantee them a 20 percent per year return, risk-free. They invest. He provides
them with statements showing that their
money is indeed growing at 20 percent [a]
year. When they ask [him] to pull a portion
of their money out so they can spend it, he
disburses it. But what he [is actually] doing
is spending all of their money and providing
fake statements. He is able to keep paying
withdrawals because he is constantly recruiting new suckers, just enough to cover
what people are withdrawing. Eventually,
people get suspicious, too many try to withdraw their money at once, and he flees the
country. This is a Ponzi scheme, named after
the Italian con [man] Charles Ponzi, who
fleeced people in this way. We will call the
Ponzi scheme scenario C.
Notice that there are similarities and differences between [the] three scenarios. A
similarity is that there is a fund that some
people are paying into while others are being
paid. Another similarity is that all three are
potentially unstable. . . . In Scenario A
(company pension), employees start living a
very long time in [their] retirement, the
amount of money in the pension fund might
not be able to cover the promised benefits,
necessitating an adjustment of the contributions from the next generation of workers.
. . . Or if, in Scenario B (middle school arcade . . . insurance), one of the kids might
be so unruly that his parents are suspending
his allowance every other week, requiring an
adjustment of the rules for payouts or contributions . . . to keep the fund sustainable.
Scenario C [the] (Ponzi scheme) is the most
unstable of all, because it depends on an
elaborate fraud, on fake accounting that disguises the fact [that] nobody has the amount
of money that they are being told they have.
It . . . only last[s] until people try to actually use the money. . . . But scenarios A and
B could also collapse if they are not managed
well.
We can see that despite the commonalities
. . . there are fundamental differences between scenarios A . . . B and scenario C. The
first two are legitimate ways for people to
pool and distribute money, and they can
work just fine . . . accomplishing their intended purpose. The third is a fraud in which
people’s money is being stolen. The difference is more important than the similarities.
I have laboriously laid out these examples
in . . . hopes that we can better understand
why Social Security can be made to look
like a ‘‘Ponzi scheme’’ but [it] isn’t . . . one
at all. ‘‘Social Security is the biggest Ponzi
scheme of all time,’’ said Musk. ‘‘People pay
into Social Security, and the money goes out
of Social Security immediately. But the obligation for Social Security is your entire retirement career.’’ Now, it’s true that in an
insurance system, the incoming payments
from new people might be used to fund outgoing payments to people who were already
part of the [Ponzi scheme.] But that’s not
what makes a Ponzi scheme a Ponzi scheme.
Musk, not for the first time, doesn’t know
what he’s talking about.
One of the reasons Social Security can be
made to seem like a Ponzi scheme is [because] people may misunderstand how it
works. People might think that Social Security saves their money over time, and then
when they retire it pays ‘‘their’’ money
back. That is not how it works. It’s not like
a savings account. The money I pay in is not
saved up for me, it’s paid out to today’s
beneficiaries. When I retire, my benefits will
be paid by the money coming in from the
next generation of workers. Discovering this
fact can make people think [that] Social Security is [a Ponzi scheme, but it is not.]
. . . . a Ponzi scheme is a fraud in which
the returns are fake. There is nothing fake
about Social Security. As long as enough
money is in the pool to pay out the beneficiaries, the operation is sustainable, and
perfectly honest. The only reason it matters
that retirees do not pay for their own benefits, but depend on the payments of the next
generation of workers, is that if there isn’t a
next generation of workers, we . . . have
[got] a problem. But fortunately, there is
every reason to believe that human beings
will continue to exist, work, and pay Social
Security taxes.
Now, what Musk and others who claim Social Security is a ‘‘scam’’ or in ‘‘crisis’’ say
is that in the future, there will not be
enough workers [to pay] retiree[s] . . . the
promised benefits. Musk says: ‘‘If you look
at the future obligations of Social Security,
it far exceeds the tax revenue . . . There’s
our present-day debt, but then there’s our future obligations . . . So, when you look at
the future obligations of Social Security, the
actual national debt is like double what people think it is because of future obligations.
. . . Basically, people are living way longer
than expected, and there are fewer babies
being born, so you have [many] people who
are retired and that live for a long time and
get retirement payments . . . However bad
the financial situation is right now for the
federal government, it’ll be much worse in
the future.’’
But while he’s trying to get you to think
this is a major problem or some deep fundamental flaw with . . . Social Security, it
isn’t. Every insurance plan has to make adjustments over time. If there are a lot of
wildfires burning down houses, a company
selling fire insurance might have to raise
premiums. . . . The increased premiums
might be small, but without them the program would go bankrupt. [This] doesn’t
mean, however, that we’d be justified in saying . . . fire insurance plans are a ‘‘Ponzi
scheme’’ destined to go bankrupt.
The adjustments needed to make Social
Security sustainable in the long term are
minor. Yes, people are living longer and having fewer babies. That means there ultimately has to be some kind of adjustment to
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.081 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1973
either how much is being paid in, how much
is being paid out, or both. Republicans want
to cut benefits. Defenders of Social Security,
instead, want to raise the money going into
it by increasing taxes paid by the wealthy.
It is so interesting that we just saw
that in the dialogue with my ideas
with ANDY KIM.
The amount of taxes that would need to be
raised in order to make Social Security solvent is negligible (the Social Security Administration has estimated that ‘‘increase in
the combined payroll tax rate from 12.4 percent to 14.4 percent’’ to make the program
sustainable for the next 75 years). As Dean
Baker and Mark Weisbrot put it in the introduction to 1999’s Social Security [book entitled]: The Phony Crisis: ‘‘The only real
threat to Social Security comes not from
any fiscal or demographic constraints but
from the political assaults on the program
by would-be ‘reformers.’ If not for these attacks, the probability that Social Security
‘will not be there’ when anyone who is alive
today retires would be about the same as the
odds that the U.S. government will not be
there.’’
Of course, in the 25 years since this was
written, the chances that the U.S. government itself someday ‘‘may not be there’’
could conceivably have gone up.
This is a funny author.
Musk is certainly trying to make sure as
little of it remains as possible. But the point
remains. The theory behind Social Security
is sound. It is not . . . like an unsustainable
con, although it’s also not like a savings account. It can easily be sustained indefinitely,
with some minor adjustments to ensure that
enough money is coming in to keep it going.
(It is also the case that even the need to
keep enough money flowing in is artificial.
As Stephanie Kelton explains, the restrictions on Social Security’s ability to pay out
are created by a legal choice, not an actual
financial constraint facing the U.S. government, which could keep paying benefits even
when Social Security’s funding ‘‘runs out’’ if
it was authorized by Congress to do so.) Beware the rhetoric of those who describe it as
in a ‘‘crisis’’ or being a scam. They either do
not understand the fundamentals of how it
works or they are deliberately trying to deceive you. (I cannot say for certain whether
Musk is knowledgeable enough to understand the basics and is lying or simply cannot wrap his head around the basic way an
old age insurance program works.)
The author continues:
As Alex Lawson of Social Security Works
explained to me, the right has been trying to
destroy Social Security since its inception.
This is for a few reasons. First, a lot of vultures stand to benefit from privatization,
just as the privatized ‘‘Medicare Advantage’’
program has enriched insurers like
UnitedHealth. Second, the right, believing
that individuals should be responsible for
their own fates, has an ideological opposition
to government social welfare programs—
even if this results in a bunch of old people
being poor. They see Social Security as an
offensive ‘‘Big Government’’ intrusion into
the free market, something that compels
people to put money into a retirement program whether they want to or not. The problem is that most of the public doesn’t share
this hatred for the concept behind Social Security, and the program is overwhelmingly
popular [on both sides of the political aisle.]
Because they have failed to win the ideological argument, the right must therefore convince the public of a different argument:
That the program is collapsing and doomed
and can only be ‘‘saved’’ through major benefit cuts, which will be stated as the euphemism of ‘‘raising the retirement age.’’
Hence the propaganda about
unsustainability and Ponzi schemes. This
can be effective because if you don’t know
much about how Social Security works, it’s
easy to be convinced that there’s something
fishy about its payment structure or that it
is heading for some dire financial apocalypse. But this is not the case. Baker and
Weisbrot are right that the threats to Social
Security come from those who say they are
trying to ‘‘save’’ it from a crisis. We need to
have a clear understanding of what is going
on so that we can fight to save a program
that works just fine and can easily be made
to continue providing retirement benefits to
every subsequent generation of Americans,
ideally ensuring that nobody has to endure
old age in poverty.
So why are they cutting Social Security staff? Thousands of people.
Again—I say this time and time
again—I am standing here because this
is not a usual time. I think our country
is facing a growing crisis. But I am
quoting so many Republicans because a
lot of us who have run stuff know that
you don’t just fire people and then realize the mistakes you have made and
beg them to come back to work. They
know that you don’t just fire people
that do essential functions in a program before you have even done assessments of what your goals and ambitions are for Social Security.
It is clear that their goal and ambition isn’t to invest in customer service
to improve the complaints that I have
heard over the years about waits,
unreturned calls, challenges at Social
Security offices. That is not their ambition.
We have missed a big opportunity to
come together in this Nation and start
to really reimagine our government
that works for people, that can do big
things and serve folks. Instead, we are
trying to demonize people; we are trying to lie about critical programs, calling this a Ponzi scheme; make up out
of thin air that somehow we are paying
thousands of people that are over 150
years old, fraudulently. We are better
than that.
To that point, I just want to again
make my facts clear. Here is an Associated Pressed fact-check from the President’s speech: ‘‘Tens of millions of dead
people aren’t getting Social Security
checks, despite Trump and Musk
claims.’’
The Trump administration is falsely
claiming that tens of millions of dead people
over 100 years old are receiving Social Security payments.
Over the past few days, President Donald
Trump and billionaire adviser Elon Musk
have said on social media and in press briefings that people who are 100, 200 and even 300
years old are improperly getting benefits—a
‘‘HUGE problem,’’ Musk wrote, as his Department of Government Efficiency digs into
federal agencies to root out waste, fraud and
abuse.
It is true that improper payments have
been made, including some to dead people.
But the numbers thrown out by Musk and
the White House are overstated and misrepresent Social Security data.
Here are the facts:
What has the Trump administration said
about payments to centenarians? On Tuesday, Trump said at a press briefing in Florida that ‘‘we have millions and millions of
people over 100 years old’’ receiving Social
Security benefits. ‘‘They’re obviously fraudulent or incompetent,’’ Trump said.
‘‘If you take all of those millions of people
off Social Security, all of a sudden we have
a very powerful Social Security with people
that are 80 and 70 and 90, but not 200 years
old,’’ he said. He also said that there’s one
person in the system listed as 360 years old.
Late Monday, Musk posted a slew of posts
on his social media platform X, including:
‘‘Maybe Twilight is real and there are a lot
of vampires collecting Social Security,’’ and
‘‘Having tens of millions of people marked in
Social Security as ‘‘ALIVE’’ when they are
definitely dead is a HUGE problem. Obviously. Some of these people would have been
alive before America existed as a country.
Think about that for a second . . . ’’
On Wednesday, Social Security’s new acting commissioner, Lee Dudek, acknowledged
recent reporting about the number of people
older than age 100 who may be receiving benefits from Social Security. ‘‘The reported
data are people in our records with a Social
Security number who do not have a date of
death associated with their record. These individuals are not necessarily receiving benefits.’’
‘‘I am confident that with DOGE’s help and
the commitment of our executive team and
workforce, that Social Security will continue to deliver for the American people,’’
Dudek said.
How big of a problem is Social Security
fraud?
A July 2024 report from Social Security’s
inspector general states that from fiscal
years 2015 through 2022, the agency paid out
almost $8.6 trillion in benefits, including
$71.8 billion—or less than 1%—in improper
payments. Most of the erroneous payments
were overpayments to living people.
In addition, in early January, the U.S.
Treasury clawed back more than $31 million
in a variety of federal payments—not just
Social Security payments—that improperly
went to dead people, a recovery that former
Treasury official David Lebryk said was
‘‘just the tip of the iceberg.’’
The money was reclaimed as part of a fivemonth pilot program after Congress gave the
Department of Treasury temporary access to
the Social Security Administration’s ‘‘Full
Death Master File’’ for three years as part of
the omnibus appropriations bill in 2021. The
SSA maintains the most complete federal
database of individuals who have died, and
the file contains more than 142 million
records, which go back to 1899, according to
the Treasury.
Treasury estimated in January that it
would recover more than $215 million during
its three-year access period, which runs from
December 2023 through 2026.
So are tens of millions of people over 100
years old receiving benefits?
No.
No. No. But the letters I read from
scared people across the country show
what happens when a President lies
and when his unelected, biggest campaign contributor, the richest man in
the world, just continue to make public
statements to insinuate fear and doubt
and chaos and then make announcements that they have to take back
that they are going to end the call-in
service, which so many seniors rely on.
Then they create more fear when
people see that posted government
buildings that are going to be sold at
auction to the private sector are actually the addresses of their Social Security offices.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.083 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1974 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Why?
Everywhere I am going around my
State and everywhere I have gone
around the country in the last few
weeks and my mom and her mostly Republican senior community are all up
in arms and feel this fear—or the people that we have read about who write
letters about losing sleep—and it is because of the chaos, the crass cruelty,
the unjustified cuts and attacks on a
program that is a bedrock between security and financial ruin for so many
Americans.
Here is the Wall Street Journal writing about this, how Trump and Musk
are undermining Social Security:
Dealing With Social Security Is Heading
From Bad to Worse. The agency that administers benefits is cutting staff and restricting
services as part of a Department of Government Efficiency review.
The Wall Street Journal writes:
The federal agency that administers Social
Security benefits is facing a customer-service mess. The Social Security Administration is cutting staff, restricting what recipients can do over the phone and closing some
local field offices that help people in person.
The number of retirees claiming benefits has
risen in recent years as baby boomers age.
Few federal agencies reach as far into
Americans’ lives as the Social Security Administration, which delivers a monthly
check to some 70 million people. Many fear
that the changes, part of President Trump’s
push to overhaul the federal government
through the Department of Government Efficiency, are eroding confidence in the nearly
90-year-old program.
The Wall Street Journal continues:
Agency officials have acknowledged that
because of a planned reduction in services
over the phone, there will be longer wait and
processing times. An estimated 75,000 to
85,000 additional visitors a week could show
up at local field offices, according to an internal memo sent by Doris Diaz, the acting
deputy commissioner for operations. (Details
of the memo, which was reviewed by The
Wall Street Journal, were reported earlier by
the Washington Post.)
That is likely to tax the agency’s 800 number, where people typically make appointments for office visits. Already, Social Security recipients have long complained about
customer service.
Holly Lawrence, 64 years old, made several
unsuccessful attempts to reach a human before she filed her Social Security claim online. The Washington, D.C.-based freelance
journalist said she called the agency’s 800
number several times starting in February.
Each time, she got an automated voice that
warned of a two-hour wait. Her calls were
disconnected before she could leave a message or request a callback.
She gave up trying to reach a customerservice agent and created an online account
on the agency’s website on March 3. She had
to wait two weeks for an account activation
code to arrive in the mail before she could
submit her claim. She is now waiting for
that claim to be reviewed and processed.
Lawrence said she has virtually no retirement savings. ‘‘I’m financially strapped and
cannot afford to get a financial adviser. It
was important to me to be able to talk to
someone at Social Security,’’ she said, adding that she is concerned the customer-service delays she encountered could negatively
affect others ‘‘who don’t have the strength to
be persistent.’’
The Wall Street Journal continues:
Social Security has a reputation as the
‘‘third rail’’ of American politics, a benefit
to which elected officials make cuts at the
risk of their own re-election. President
Trump has vowed not to cut benefits. But he
and DOGE’s leader, Elon Musk, have made
unfounded claims of widespread fraud in the
program.
I am going to repeat that sentence by
the Wall Street Journal:
[H]e and DOGE’s leader, Elon Musk, have
made unfounded claims of widespread fraud
in the program.
Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick said
in a recent podcast interview that if Social
Security checks were hypothetically delayed, it might catch those guilty of fraud
because they would make ‘‘the loudest noise
screaming, yelling and complaining.’’
Critics say turmoil at the agency is undermining trust in the safety-net programs.
‘‘They’re killing these programs from the
inside,’’ said Illinois Gov. JB Pritzker, a
Democrat. ‘‘The result of which is, we don’t
know what they are doing to tear down the
scaffolding that holds Social Security together.’’
DOGE has gained access to systems containing personal information but a federal
judge has temporarily blocked those efforts.
On Friday, Leland Dudek, acting Social Security commissioner, threatened to shut
down the agency because of the order, but
later reversed course.
Dudek, the acting commissioner, said the
changes ‘‘are designed to make sure the
right payment is to the right person at the
right time. It’s a common-sense measure.’’
Even before DOGE’s plans went into motion, the agency’s customer-service operation had been showing signs of strain.
Roughly 47% of the quarter million people
who call Social Security’s 800-number on an
average day have gotten through to a representative this year. That is down from
nearly 60% in 2024. The average time to wait
for a callback is over two hours.
There has been a steady decline in the
agency’s staff, and DOGE plans to cut employment by another 12% this year. That
would bring the total number of employees
to about 50,000, from about 57,000 today and
nearly 68,000 in 2010.
‘‘Customer service has been going downhill
for years,’’ said Bill Sweeney, senior vice
president at AARP. ‘‘It’s going to get
worse.’’
Some of the Social Security Administration’s changes amount to cuts in services.
The Wall Street Journal continues:
Starting March 31, people who want to file
for retirement, survivor or disability benefits or change their direct deposit information can no longer complete the process by
phone, the agency said Tuesday. Instead
they must do so online or at a field office.
The agency said it is stopping phone
claims as part of an effort to reduce fraud
and strengthen identity-proofing procedures.
The Social Security agency has estimated
that improper payments represent 0.3% of
total benefits.
Dudek acknowledged that recent changes,
including the shift away from claiming on
the phone, are likely to drive up the numbers
making appointments at field offices over
the next 60 days. He said field employees
would be trained over the next two weeks to
respond to the changes.
‘‘We’re going to adjust our policy and our
procedures to adapt to that volume,’’ he said
in a recent call with reporters. ‘‘These
changes are not intended to hurt our customers.’’
Dudek said Monday in a call with advocates that the phone service policy change
and quick timeline were directed by the
White House, according to people familiar
with the call.
Directed by the White House.
Kathleen Romig, director of Social Security and disability policy at the Center on
Budget and Policy Priorities, says it isn’t
clear why the agency chose to discontinue
identity verification over the phone, while
allowing it online and in person. She and
other advocates say that by discontinuing
the phone option, the agency is creating hurdles for those who lack internet service or
live far from a field office.
The agency has also largely stopped serving walk-in customers in field offices, said
Maria Freese, senior legislative representative at the nonprofit National Committee to
Preserve Social Security & Medicare. Most
wanting in-person service must book appointments on the 800-number.
In February, 45% of people who scheduled a
phone or in-person appointment to file a
claim got one within 28 days.
DOGE plans to close nearly 50 of the agency’s approximately 1,200 field offices, according to Social Security Works, although a
spokeswoman for the nonprofit said some of
the offices on the list ‘‘don’t seem to exist.’’
Frank Bisgnano, chairman and CEO of
Fiserv, Inc, has been picked by Trump to
serve as [Social Security’s] commissioner
and will appear before the Senate Finance
Committee on Tuesday.
I mean, this is the Wall Street Journal pointing out utter incompetence,
utter incompetence. And they are rolling back, trying to catch up, but they
don’t seem to care, and the way they
are going about this they are hurting
seniors. They are undermining the security of the program.
The title of the Wall Street Journal’s
article is the best, it is taking services,
Social Security services are now going
from bad to worse, under this leadership, who promised they were going to
serve people.
I see the Senator standing, and I will
yield for a question while retaining the
floor, if he has one.
Mr. MURPHY. Senator BOOKER, I am
going to pose to you a pretty simple
question here, but, first, let me lay
down a little bit of a predicate.
You know, we have heard already
some talk tonight about this extraordinary statement, but not terribly surprising, from the Secretary of Commerce, who is a close friend of the
President, somebody who is very close
to all of the decisions being made in
the White House, where he said, you
know, that if a Social Security recipient misses their check for a month,
then they should not complain.
My mother-in-law wouldn’t complain.
That is easy for him to say, you
know, maybe you wouldn’t complain if
your son-in-law was a billionaire. You
probably are not going to be harmed by
missing a Social Security check if you
have got a billionaire in the family.
But 99.99 percent of Americans do not
have a billionaire that they can get on
the phone if they miss a month, and 1
month’s Social Security check disappearing is a cataclysm for a lot of
families.
As I was listening to you, I just did a
little bit of, you know, easy, back-ofVerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.084 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1975
the-napkin math. So the average Social Security check, on a monthly
basis, in this country is somewhere
around $2,000. Obviously, it varies
based on how much money you put in
and what your income was, but, on average, it is about $2,000.
Now, some Americans have supplemental retirement income, but fewer
and fewer do today because it is just
not the case any longer that employers
are going to provide for you a defined
benefit plan. So if you were working
minimum wage your entire life or if
you were working a low-wage job, you
are not going to have money to put
away in Social Security.
I remember during one of my walks
across the State of Connecticut, spending about half an hour walking with an
elderly gentleman in Willimantic, CT,
and he told me a story that is not
atypical. He worked his entire life.
Most of his adult life he worked for
Walmart. He was really proud of working for Walmart. He helped a whole
bunch of people in his community. He
was working for a great American company, a company he was proud of. He
was helping people every single day
that lived in his neighborhood get what
they needed when they came into the
store.
But you know the wage he was making at Walmart. He was making very
little, and they didn’t have any defined
benefit plan. They would let him save a
little bit of money if he could find the
means, but he couldn’t because every
single dime that he made from
Walmart had to go to rent and groceries and medicine and cell phone bill
and transportation.
And so he worked for 20 years at
Walmart, and when he retired, do you
know how much he had in savings?
Zero. Zero. And he felt like he had done
everything people had asked him for.
He worked for a great American company. He helped people. He worked full
time. He didn’t miss time. He didn’t
goof around.
And when he retired, he had nothing—nothing—saved. So the Social Security check, which to him was probably about $2,000 a month, was everything he had. And he is walking with
me explaining to me what his life is
like today. He was coming out of the
liquor store, and that was one of the
things he did every day was go down to
the liquor store and, you know, buy a
nip or two and, you know, just pass a
couple hours. He didn’t like to spend a
lot of time in his house because he has
roommates.
He lives in a small apartment with
two other guys, strangers. He doesn’t
know them. And he says to me as we
are walking: This is not how I expected
my life to go. I thought if I worked my
entire life and I played by the rules and
I worked hard, you know, I would have
a little bit more dignified retirement
than this. I share a room with two
other guys that I don’t know.
And that is the reality for a lot of
Americans. That is the reality for a lot
of retirees. You know, $2,000 is the average Social Security check. I don’t
know why I picked Tallahassee, but I
just picked Tallahassee. I said what is
the average one-bedroom rent in Tallahassee? It is $1,200, utilities are probably a couple hundred dollars, the average senior citizen spends $500 a month
on food. Rent, utilities, food, that is it.
That is your $2,000. You have nothing
left if you are 1 of the 7 million Americans who rely only on Social Security
like my friend from Willimantic.
You have nothing left for medicine,
for transportation. You have got nothing left for a cell phone. You have
nothing left to go to the movies once a
month. You have nothing left for presents for your grandkids for Christmas
or for their birthday. If you are relying
on Social Security—and many people
who have worked their entire life are—
you go without that check for 1 month,
your whole life falls apart.
And so this ‘‘cavalierness’’ that Musk
and Trump have about Social Security,
that the billionaires that advise them
have about Social Security: Don’t
worry about it if you miss a check for
a month or 2 months. You are a
fraudster. You are trying to defraud
the government if you complain about
missing a Social Security check. It is
so disconnected from reality.
I know we are going to talk later
today about the plans to shut down the
Department of Education. It shows this
similar disdain for public education,
the way that they are showing a disdain for working Americans who are
relying on Social Security as their primary means of retirement income, the
disdain for the 40 million working
Americans who rely on Medicaid.
And it is not hard to understand why,
because if you are a billionaire, if you
are Elon Musk, if you are Donald
Trump, you don’t have to rely on the
public school system. Your kids go to
fancy private schools. You will never
need to rely on Medicaid. You have
lived fortunate lives—in Donald
Trump’s case because he was born into
wealth. You will get a Social Security
check, but that is not going to be your
primary retirement.
And so you can understand, if you
put a bunch of billionaires in charge of
the government who don’t lead lives
that are remotely connected to how average people live, they will say things
like Social Security is just one big
Ponzi scheme, and that is the big one
to eliminate or, you know what, America will be all right if we impose $880
billion in cuts to the insurance program for 24 percent of Americans or
let’s shut down the Department of Education because, I don’t know, public
education doesn’t matter to me.
So I think it is just the reality that
we are living in today in which we have
people who are making these decisions
who just don’t understand how normal
people’s lives work and, in particular,
how a person’s life falls apart if they
have any diminution in their Social
Security income, when the average
check is $2,000 a month and the average
expenses in most cities for a senior citizen who relies on Social Security are
going to be far higher than $2,000 a
month.
Here is my question for you. You laid
out what is going on with Social Security today. It is like the opposite of efficiency. It is called the Department of
Government Efficiency. And what we
know for certain in the Social Security
system is that everything they are
doing has the intent of making the system less efficient, right? You don’t just
close dozens of offices and shut down
the phone system to make the system
more efficient. You do that to make
the system less efficient.
And so I am trying to figure out why,
right? I am trying to figure out why.
And I will give you, you know, two
theories and then let you tell me if you
think I am right or I am wrong. It
could be a pretext to eradicate the
whole system.
What did they say about USAID?
They said that USAID was a corrupt
enterprise. It was corrupt. No evidence
of corruption in USAID. No evidence of
corruption, no allegations of specific
corruption, but they just made these
accusations that USAID was criminal.
Musk and Trump said this: It is a
criminal enterprise. It is a corrupt enterprise. And that became their justification to eliminate it. Within
weeks, USAID, one of the most important vehicles of U.S. national security
was gone—was gone. They didn’t run
on that. Nobody saw that coming.
It was 2 weeks of allegations about
criminality and corruption, and then
USAID vanished. And people were like
looking around, what happened? They
didn’t tell us they were going to do
that, and now it is gone. They certainly didn’t run on eliminating Social
Security or cutting people’s benefits.
But, boy, the playbook seems a little
familiar here that all of a sudden there
are these lies being told. Lies being
told. Let’s say what it is about the corruption inside Social Security.
As you said, the improper benefit
payments are minuscule, right, .3 percent of overall payments.
And so is this a pretext to ultimately
make big cuts in Social Security or, alternatively, is it just part of a plan to
just sort of put the entire country on
edge, right? To just make everybody
wake up in the morning wondering
whether they are next, right? Is it my
Medicaid benefit that is going to be
cut? Is Social Security going to be
there for me if I am a Federal employee? You know, is my job here next
week?
And is that a means of distracting
you from the corruption, the thievery
that is happening at the highest levels
of government? Is that in service of an
agenda to try to convert this country
from democracy to something else, if
everybody is just so focused on the
next hit, Medicare, Medicaid, Social
Security, my son losing his Federal
job? Is that a means to ultimately try
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.086 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1976 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
to drive an agenda through the back
door while people are looking at the
threats coming at them through the
front door? It is clearly not about efficiency. I mean, that is what we know.
The changes they are making to Social
Security are not about efficiency, so
the question is, What is the agenda
here if it is not efficiency?
Mr. BOOKER. And, again, you and I
and the Presiding Officer, there are a
lot of people here I know that operate
from just a place of just like decency.
There are problems with government.
We need to fix them. We need to make
government more efficient. We need to
deal with the national debt.
There are so many things that people
on the right and the left don’t agree
on. You and I can agree that, God bless
America, the government could be a lot
more efficient.
But the question is, They are not
playing on the level. There are lies
about USAID like, I don’t know, 5 million condoms going to Gaza or something outrageous and easily proven
false, time and time again. The President of the United States, again, this
doesn’t shock people anymore, he is a
President, more than any other modern
President, by independent fact-checkers, has been proven to lie over and
over again.
But as I sat there listening to his
speech, and he just goes on and on
about transgender mice when that was
proven to be utterly a lie or else somebody just misreading the kind of mice
that are used in medical experiments
which have a similar word.
So are they lying in order to attack
these programs? DOGE is insidious in
the fact that they keep posting things
and then having to pull them down because, just, independent folks.
And I have article after article—we
are so far behind on this agenda of
things to get through, I am not going
to read them all, some of them I will
submit to the RECORD—but not people
on the left calling them out for what
they are doing and saying being a lie
about Social Security.
So you are pointing out a pattern.
First, they tell terrible lies to try to
whip up public sentiment against entities created in a bipartisan way, by the
way.
Mr. MURPHY. Right.
Mr. BOOKER. Using congressional
powers, approving spending, approving
programs, approving Agencies. Let’s
create incredible lies. Magnify them on
social media, try to spread them with
our influencers and everybody. So now
people believe that somehow, oh, the
President talked about all this money
going to transgender mice. That is a
lie.
But we are going to use that as an excuse to attack the scientific funding.
We are going to use that as an excuse
to attack Medicaid. We are going to
use that as an excuse to pull the people
fighting Ebola out of East Africa.
And so I was told by a colleague of
mine, a Republican colleague of mine:
When you come here, don’t try to get
in the head of your colleague and understand what their motivations are.
But this, to me, is a pattern in which
they are trying to undermine public
confidence. And the result of this pattern has seniors—letter after letter I
wrote—using things like ‘‘I am losing
sleep.’’ ‘‘I am terrified.’’ ‘‘I am scared.’’
‘‘Help me, please.’’ Telling the most
painful stories about retirement insecurity, about health challenges.
And so, again, I have this expectation, whether you are a Republican or
Democratic President, you don’t insinuate fear amongst vulnerable communities. You don’t insinuate fears
amongst our elders who deserve respect
and deserve to retire with dignity. You
don’t do that. You stand boldly in front
of them and say: Do you know what?
There are some things we are going to
improve. We are going to try to bring
the best minds in America to make the
best customer service because every
independent group has been saying
that the customer service is failing.
Yeah, we want to go after fraud and
abuse. We are not going to do it. The
first thing we are going to do is fire the
inspectors general who have a better
record than Elon Musk does over this
last decade rooting out fraud and abuse
under Democrat and Republican Presidents. It just doesn’t add up. It is not
on the level.
So before I allow you to ask this next
question: What does this amount to,
Senator MURPHY? Ultimately, what
this amounts to is an attack on the
programs, the healthcare, the services,
the retirement security that millions
of Americans rely on. And often, for
them, what they are relying on is the
difference between safety and security
and chaos and destitution. I am not exaggerating that.
When somebody’s Social Security
check is the only income they have and
they have already downsized—as you
said, brought in roommates—doing everything they can to cut costs because,
under this President, costs are going
up.
This is why we have to stand and not
let this happen.
Mr. MURPHY. Will the gentleman
yield?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I will yield for a
question while retaining the floor.
Mr. MURPHY. So there is also a
third agenda here. We were not necessarily both here at this time, but a
few Republican administrations ago,
there was an attempt to privatize Social Security, to take, you know, the
corpus and move that money into the
hands of the private sector for them to
manage the money and, of course,
charge a fee or a commission for the
management of the money. The Social
Security trust fund, if sort of fully
handed over to investors on Wall
Street, could make a lot of money for
that industry.
The American people rose up against
that. It was stopped in its tracks. But
that is still a priority for a lot of allies
of the President, to get their hands on
that money inside Social Security.
And, again, I am previewing a future
conversation, but I keep on making the
analogy to what is happening inside
the education space because those
same industries—whether it was the investment banks or private-equity
firms—get wide-eyed at our public education dollars as well because they
would love to get their hands on those
public education dollars and have private equity companies running our elementary schools, middle schools, and
high schools and skimming a little bit
of money off the top to pay back their
investors.
And so, you know, the other potential agenda here is to attack the public
administration of Social Security, attack the public administration of our
public schools in order to shift that administration—and the oversight of the
investments in the case of the Social
Security—to the private sector so that
the President can hand those functions
and that oversight to friends in the private sector. And, once again, it just becomes a money-making vehicle for
folks who are already doing very well
instead of an exercise in just trying to
promote governance.
Instead of the agenda simply being
the education of our kids or the administration of a benefit program, it just
becomes about making somebody else
money.
I pose that as a question to my friend
because we saw this attempt to try to
privatize Social Security, and you can
certainly see at the end of this assault,
this false assault on the inefficiency of
the public administration, the solution
being to turn the program over to the
private sector, the privatization of Social Security that many Republicans
have wanted for a long time finally
coming to fruition.
Mr. BOOKER. Right. But that is the
problem, right? Is that if you have an
idea, bring it. Let’s have an actual debate. Let’s bring in experts. Let’s have
a debate.
The person you are talking about,
Bush, who had that idea, he had the
good sense to say: Do You know what?
I am not going to try to kill the Agency. I am not going to lay off thousands
of their employees. I am not going to
drive the services it provides, make
them worse, to be called out by rightleaning newspapers and right-leaning
writers. I am actually going to bring
my idea forward, and let’s have the debate in Congress. Let’s bring people together. Let’s hold the hearings. Let’s
have the conversation.
I can deal with that because—this is
going to surprise you, Senator MURPHY—I have had conclusions about policy positions that I have changed over
the years. When I had a debate, I had a
contest of ideas, people have persuaded
me.
But that is not the way Trump operates. He tried to kill healthcare without a plan. The powerful letter I read
by John McCain about why he voted
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.087 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1977
no, it was because it was first: Kill this
thing that people rely on. Don’t worry.
Trust me. We will figure it out later.
That is what is happening with Medicaid right now. There is no conversation about how to better provide
healthcare to the tens of millions of
people that rely on Medicaid, from our
seniors to expectant mothers to people
with disabilities—no conversation.
They are just sending people into dark
rooms and saying: Here is $880 billion I
need. Find a way to cut it. Let’s kill it
and see what happens.
Mr. MURPHY. Ready, fire, aim.
Mr. BOOKER. Ready, fire, aim.
Senator MURPHY, I prepared for so
many days on this, and we are talking
about the points so I am going to submit—there are lots of articles here that
I am going to submit to the RECORD.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have printed in the RECORD a
Washington Post article about ‘‘Long
waits, waves of calls, website crashes:
Social Security is breaking down.’’
There being no objection, the
materia1 was ordered to be printed in
the RECORD, as follows:
LONG WAITS, WAVES OF CALLS, WEBSITE
CRASHES: SOCIAL SECURITY IS BREAKING DOWN
(By Lisa Rein and Hannah Natanson)
The Social Security Administration
website crashed four times in 10 days this
month, blocking millions of retirees and disabled Americans from logging in to their online accounts because the servers were overloaded. In the field, office managers have resorted to answering phones at the front desk
as receptionists because so many employees
have been pushed out.
But the agency no longer has a system to
monitor customers’ experience with these
services, because that office was eliminated
as part of the cost-cutting efforts led by Elon
Musk.
And the phones keep ringing. And ringing.
The federal agency that delivers $1.5 trillion a year in earned benefits to 73 million
retired workers, their survivors and poor and
disabled Americans is engulfed in crisis—further undermining its ability to provide reliable and quick service to vulnerable customers, according to internal documents and
more than two dozen current and former
agency employees and officials, customers
and others who interact with Social Security.
Financial services executive Frank
Bisignano is scheduled to face lawmakers
Tuesday during a Senate confirmation hearing as President Donald Trump’s pick to become the permanent commissioner.
For now, the agency is run by a caretaker
leader in his sixth week on the job who has
raced to push out more than 12 percent of the
staff of 57,000. He has conceded that the
agency’s phone service ‘‘sucks’’ and acknowledged that Musk’s U.S. DOGE Service is
really in charge, pushing a single-minded
mission to find benefits fraud despite vast
evidence that the problem is overstated.
The turmoil is leaving many retirees, disabled claimants and legal immigrants who
need Social Security cards with less access
or shut out of the system altogether, according to those familiar with the problems.
‘‘What’s going on is the destruction of the
agency from the inside out, and it’s accelerating,’’ Sen. Angus King (I–Maine) said in
an interview. ‘‘I have people approaching me
all the time in their 70s and 80s, and they’re
beside themselves. They don’t know what’s
coming.’’
King’s home state has the country’s oldest
population. ‘‘What they’re doing now is unconscionable,’’ he said.
Leland Dudek—the accidental leader elevated to acting commissioner after he fed
data to Musk’s team behind his bosses’
backs—has issued rapid-fire policy changes
that have created chaos for front-line staff.
Under pressure from the secretive Musk
team, Dudek has pushed out dozens of officials with years of expertise in running Social Security’s complex benefit and information technology systems. Others have left in
disgust.
The moves have upended an agency that,
despite the popularity of its programs, has
been underfunded for years, faces potential
insolvency in a decade and has been led by
four commissioners in five months—just one
of them Senate-confirmed. The latest controversy came last week, when Dudek
threatened to shut down operations in response to a federal judge’s ruling that Dudek
claimed would leave no one with access to
beneficiaries’ personal information to serve
them.
Alarmed lawmakers are straining to answer questions from angry constituents in
their districts. Calls have flooded into congressional offices. The AARP announced on
Monday that more than 2,000 retirees per
week have called the organization since
early February—double the usual number—
with concerns about whether benefits they
paid for during their working careers will
continue. Social Security is the primary
source of income for about 40 percent of
older Americans.
Trump has said repeatedly that the administration ‘‘won’t touch’’ Social Security, a
promise that aides say applies to benefit levels that can only be adjusted by Congress.
But in just six weeks, the cuts to staffing
and offices have already taken a toll on access to benefits, officials and advocates say.
CREATING A FIRE
With aging technology systems and a $15
billion budget that has stayed relatively flat
over a decade, Social Security was already
struggling to serve the public amid an explosion of retiring baby boomers. The staff that
reviews claims for two disability programs
was on life support following massive pandemic turnover—and still takes 233 days on
average to review an initial claim.
But current and former officials, advocates
and others who interact with the agency—
many of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retribution—said Social
Security has been damaged even further by
the rapid cuts and chaos of Trump’s first two
months in office. Many current and former
officials fear it’s part of a long-sought effort
by conservatives to privatize all or part of
the agency.
‘‘They’re creating a fire to require them to
come and put it out,’’ said one high-ranking
official who took early retirement this
month.
Dudek, who was elevated from a mid-level
data analyst in the anti-fraud office, hurried
to cut costs when he took over in mid-February, canceling research contracts, offering
early-retirement incentives and buyouts
across the agency, and consolidating programs and regional offices. Entire offices, including those handling civil rights and modernization, were driven out. The 10 regional
offices that oversee field operations were
slashed to four.
‘‘I do not want to destroy the agency,’’ he
said in an interview Monday. ‘‘The president
wants it to succeed by cutting out the red
tape to improve service while improving security.’’
Musk’s DOGE team began poring through
Social Security’s massive trove of private
data on millions of Americans, working in a
fourth-floor conference room at the
Woodlawn, Maryland, headquarters, with
blackout curtains on the windows and an
armed security guard posted outside.
Their obsession with false claims that millions of deceased people were fraudulently
receiving benefits consumed the DOGE team
at first. Then came new mandates designed
to address alleged fraud: Direct deposit
transactions and identity authentication
that affect almost everyone receiving benefits will no longer be able to be done by
phone.
Customers with computers will be directed
to go through the process online—and those
without access to one to wait in line at their
local field office. A change announced internally last week will require legal immigrants with authorization to work in the
United States and newly naturalized citizens
to apply for or update their Social Security
cards in person, eliminating a long-standing
practice that sent the cards automatically
through the mail.
‘‘We realize this is a significant change and
there will be a significant impact to customers,’’ Doris Diaz, the deputy commissioner of operations, told the field staff on
Monday during a briefing on the changes, a
recording of which was obtained by The
Washington Post. She said the agency was
‘‘working on a process’’ for homeless and
homebound customers who cannot use computers or come into an office—and acknowledged that service levels will decline.
In the weeks before that Monday briefing,
phone calls to Social Security surged—with
questions from anxious callers wondering
whether their benefits had been cut, if they
would be cut and desperate to get an in-person field office appointment. That is if they
could get through to a live person.
Depending on the time of day, a recorded
message tells callers that their wait on hold
will last more than 120 minutes or 180 minutes. Some report being on hold for four or
five hours. A callback function was only
available three out of 12 times when a reporter for The Post called the toll-free line
last week, presumably because the queue
that day was so long that the call would not
be returned by close of business.
The recording that Kathy Martinez, 66,
heard when she called the toll-free number
two weeks ago from her home in the Bay
Area said her hold time would be more than
three hours—she was calling to ask what her
retirement check would come to if she filed
for benefits now or waited until she turns 70.
She hung up and tried again last week at 7
a.m. Pacific time. The wait was more than
120 minutes, but she was offered a callback
option, and in two hours she spoke with a
‘‘phenomenally kind person who called me,’’
she said.
Martinez said she wants to wait to file for
benefits to maximize the size of her check.
But ‘‘I’m kind of thinking, I wonder if I
should take it now. When I apply, I will do it
over the phone. But will there still be a
phone system?’’
NOT ACCEPTABLE
Aging, inefficient phone systems have dogged Social Security for years. A modernization contract with Verizon started under the
first Trump administration suffered from
multiple delays, system crashes and other
problems. As commissioner during the last
year of the Biden administration, former
Maryland governor Martin O’Malley moved
the project to a new contractor, Amazon Web
Services, and data shows that the average
wait time for the toll-free line was down to
50 minutes, half of today’s average time on
hold. But O’Malley ran out of time to switch
the new system to field office phones, he
said.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:00 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.113 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1978 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Now a perfect storm has overtaken the system. Turnover that’s normally higher than
10 percent has worsened at the 24 call centers
across the country. Some employees took
early retirement and buyout offers—a number Dudek said was ‘‘not huge,’’ but that current and former officials estimate could be
significant.
Shonda Johnson, a vice president representing 5,000 call center staff at the American Federation of Government Employees
Council 220, said the job’s low pay—starting
salary is $32,000 a year—anger at a return-tooffice mandate after years of telework, rapid
policy changes and frustration with how the
Trump administration is treating federal
employees have hurt morale to the point
that people aren’t giving their all to the job.
‘‘When you’re facing threats yourself, it
kind of prevents you from being totally
there for the public you’re servicing,’’ she
said.
Asked about degrading phone service,
Dudek told reporters in a call last week that
‘‘a 24 percent answer rate is not acceptable.’’
‘‘I want people who want to get to a person
to get to a person.’’ He said ‘‘all options are
on the table’’ to improve phone service, including outsourcing some call center service.
On Monday, Dudek said the agency is working with U.S. Postal Service on an agreement to take on new requirements to verify
claimants’ identities.
The new limits on phone transactions
don’t take effect until next week, but field
offices have been deluged for weeks, even as
DOGE is targeting an unspecified number of
field and hearing offices for closure over the
next three years.
In one office in central Indiana, the phone
lines are jammed by 9 a.m. with retirees by
the hundreds, taxing the beleaguered staff of
less than a dozen who were already responsible for nearly 70,000 claimants across the
state, according to one employee, who like
others spoke on the condition of anonymity
for fear of retribution. The employee said the
questions have become predictable: What is
the U.S. DOGE Service doing to Social Security? Will the office close? Will my benefits
continue?
The employees, with no new training yet
on the impending changes, have few answers.
‘‘I hope we’re going to be here,’’ the employee tells caller after caller. ‘‘But I can’t
guarantee anything.’’
Complicated benefits cases are falling by
the wayside, the employee said. Online
claims, which are completed by field staff,
are backed up. ‘‘There is just no time to
breathe or get anything else done,’’ she said.
‘‘We used to be efficient.’’
Another employee in a regional office said
the staff was told at a recent briefing that
field offices across the country are seeing
‘‘exponential growth’’ in foot traffic.
The elderly are not only calling, but showing up at brick-and-mortar buildings to ask
about the DOGE-led changes. In one Philadelphia office, the federal government’s mandated return-to-office edict has left 1,200
staffers competing for about 300 parking
spots each day, according to an employee.
Staff wake up as early as 4:30 a.m. to try to
snag a space, but many still fail, leading
some to buy backup spots for $200 a month
nearby.
As morale has cratered, some employees
have stopped wearing business clothes to the
office and now come to work in jeans and a
T-shirt because, as they tell colleagues, they
no longer take pride in their work, the employee said.
OFF THE CHARTS
Scammers are already taking advantage of
the chaotic moment, according to internal
emails obtained by The Post. Last week,
staff in several offices warned employees
that seniors were reporting receiving emails
from fake accounts pretending to be linked
to Social Security. The messages asked recipients to verify their identity to keep receiving benefits, per the emails.
‘‘Sounds like scammers are jumping on
this press release to trick the elderly,’’ one
Social Security staffer wrote to colleagues
on Thursday, referring to the agency’s announcement of the in-person verification
program.
In Baltimore, an employee who works on
critical payment systems said nearly a quarter of his team is already gone or will soon
be out the door due to resignations and retirements. Talented software developers and
analysts were quick to secure high-paying
new roles in the private sector, he said—and
the reduction in highly skilled staff is already having consequences.
His office is supposed to complete several
software update and modernization processes
required by law within the next few weeks
and months, he said. But with the departures, it seems increasingly likely that they
will miss those deadlines.
His team is also called on to fix complicated cases in which technology glitches
mistakenly stop payments. But many of the
experts for those fixes are exiting.
‘‘That has to get cleaned up on a case-bycase basis, and the experts in how to do that
are leaving,’’ the Baltimore employee said.
‘‘We will have cases that get stuck, and
they’re not going to be able to get fixed. People could be out of benefits for months.’’
Meanwhile, a DOGE-imposed spending
freeze has left many field offices without
paper, pens and the phone headsets staff need
to do their jobs communicating with callers—at the exact moment phone calls are
spiking, the employee in Indiana said.
The freeze drove all federal credit cards to
a $1 1imit. Social Security saw the number of
its approved purchasers reduced to about a
dozen people for 1,300 offices, said one agency
employee in the Northeast.
Each of these purchasers must seek greenlighting from higher-ups for anything other
than a list of 12 specific preapproved transactions, according to emails obtained by The
Post. The list includes ‘‘shipping costs,’’
‘‘phone bills,’’ ‘‘Legionella testing’’ and
‘‘services to support fire safety and emergency response.’’ It does not include basic office supplies.
The field office in Portland, Oregon, is so
slammed that the claims staff has told advocates to send questions or information by fax
because they can’t get to the phones, according to Chase Stowell, case management supervisor for Assist, a nonprofit group that
helps the disabled apply for benefits, many of
whom are homeless.
‘‘The attrition rates in Portland are off the
charts,’’ Stowell said. ‘‘They just don’t pick
up the phone. They were already shortstaffed. They’ve told us they just don’t trust
that there’s a reliable system to get ahold of
them by voicemail.’’
The service issues keep bubbling up to
members of Congress. Hundreds of Maryland
residents turned out for a town hall meeting
last week hosted by Baltimore County Council member Pat Young about a mile from Social Security headquarters.
Asked by one retiree in the audience to
provide ‘‘a little bit of hope’’ that his Social
Security benefits would not be cut, Sen. Angela Alsobrooks (D–Maryland) conceded,
‘‘The truth of the matter is that we don’t
know what they intend.’’
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you to the Presiding Officer and my friend whom I am
keeping up at 3 a.m. He is a kind and
generous man to be here.
Here is a closure of Social Security
offices, 47 closures across the country
in red States and blue States, everywhere between. Closures of Social Security offices. I know everybody is
talking about cutting Social Security,
but what they are doing right now—
right now—is grinding the services of
Social Security, grinding them down.
The article from the Associated
Press, ‘‘A list of the Social Security offices across the US expected to close
this year,’’ can be found online at
https://apnews.com/article/social-securi
ty-offices-closures-doge-trump-b2b1a5b
2ba4fb968abc3379bf90715ff.
I want to read some of the places:
Alabama, 634—this is without the rest
of the language I just put in the record,
but just for folks out there who are
watching. These are the places, Social
Security offices that provide really important services to your community,
that this administration and Elon
Musk are closing: Alabama, 634 Broad
Street; Arkansas, 965 Holiday Drive,
Forrest City; 4083 Jefferson Avenue,
Texarkana.
In the great State of Colorado, they
are closing 825 North Crest Drive,
Grand Junction. In Florida, they are
closing 4740 Dairy Road in Melbourne.
In Georgia, they are closing 1338 Broadway in Columbus. In Kentucky, they
are closing 825 High Street in Hazard.
In Louisiana, they are closing 178 Civic
Center Drive, Houma.
In Mississippi, there are three places
they are closing: 4717 26th Street, Meridian—Meridian, excuse me, to the
great people who live there—604
Yalobusha Street in Greenwood, 2383
Sunset Drive in Grenada, MS. In Montana, they are closing 3701 American
Way.
They are closing Social Security offices in North Carolina: 730 Roanoke
Avenue, Roanoke Rapids. They are
closing 2123 Lakeside Drive in Franklin, NC. They are closing 2805 Charles
Boulevard in Greenville, NC—I know
that town. They are closing 1865 West
City Drive, Elizabeth City, NC. North
Dakota, they are closing 414 20th Avenue SW—forgive me the great people
who live in this community—Minot. I
am sure I am butchering it.
In Nevada, where my mom lives, in
the city my mom lives, they are closing 701 Bridger Avenue, Las Vegas.
In New York, 75 South Broadway,
White Plains—my mom worked there—
and 332 Main Street in Poughkeepsie,
NY. In Ohio, 30 North Diamond Street,
Mansfield. In Oklahoma, 1610 SW Lee
Boulevard. In Texas, they are closing
two offices: 1122 North University
Drive. I know the people are going to
write me letters that I am mispronouncing their town names.
Nacogdoches?
Anyone from Texas here? No?
I am sorry. 8208 NE Zac Lentz Parkway. In West Virginia, they are closing
1103 George Kostas Drive. In Wyoming,
they are closing 79 Winston Drive,
Rock Springs, WY.
They are cutting the Social Security
staff. How deeply are they cutting?
VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:27 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A31MR6.027 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1979
They are cutting thousands. We have
already talked about it.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have printed in the RECORD an
article from the Associated Press, ‘‘Social Security Administration could cut
up to 50% of its workforce.’’
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
[February 27, 2025]
SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION COULD CUT
UP TO 50% OF ITS WORKFORCE
WASHINGTON (AP)—The Social Security Administration is preparing to lay off at least
7,000 people from its workforce of 60,000 according to a person familiar with the agency’s plans who is not authorized to speak
publicly. The workforce reduction, according
to a second person who also spoke on the
condition of anonymity, could be as high as
50%.
It’s unclear how the layoffs will directly
impact the benefits of the 72.5 million Social
Security beneficiaries, which include retirees and children who receive retirement and
disability benefits. However, advocates and
Democratic lawmakers warn that layoffs
will reduce the agency’s ability to serve recipients in a timely manner.
Some say cuts to the workforce are, in effect, a cut in benefits.
Later Friday, the agency sent out a news
release outlining plans for ‘‘significant
workforce reductions,’’ employee reassignments from ‘‘non-mission critical positions
to mission critical direct service positions,’’
and an offer of voluntary separation agreements. The agency said in its letter to workers that reassignments ‘‘may be involuntary
and may require retraining for new workloads.’’
The layoffs are part of the Trump administration’s intensified efforts to shrink the size
of the federal workforce through the Department of Government Efficiency, run by
President Donald Trump’s advisor Elon
Musk.
A representative from the Social Security
Administration did not respond to an Associated Press request for comment.
The people familiar with the agency’s
plans say that SSA’s new acting commissioner Leland Dudek held a meeting this
week with management and told them they
had to produce a plan that eliminated half of
the workforce at SSA headquarters in Washington and at least half of the workers in regional offices.
In addition, the termination of office
leases for Social Security sites across the
country are detailed on the DOGE website,
which maintains a ‘‘Wall of Receipts,’’ which
is a self-described ‘‘transparent account of
DOGE’s findings and actions.’’ The site
states that leases for dozens of Social Security sites across Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana,
Florida, Kentucky, North Carolina, and
other states have been or will be ended.
‘‘The Social Security Administration is already chronically understaffed. Now, the
Trump Administration wants to demolish
it,’’ said Nancy Altman, president of Social
Security Works, an advocacy group for the
popular public benefit program.
Altman said the reductions in force ‘‘will
deny many Americans access to their hardearned Social Security benefits. Field offices
around the country will close. Wait times for
the 1–800 number will soar.’’
Social Security is one of the nation’s largest and most popular social programs. A January poll from The Associated Press-NORC
Center for Public Affairs Research found
that two-thirds of U.S. adults think the
country is spending too little on Social Security.
The program faces a looming bankruptcy
date if it is not addressed by Congress. The
May 2024 Social Security and Medicare trustees’ report states that Social Security’s
trust funds—which cover old age and disability recipients—will be unable to pay full
benefits beginning in 2035. Then, Social Security would only be able to pay 83% of benefits.
Like other agencies, DOGE has embedded
into the Social Security Administration as
part of Trump’s January executive order,
which has drawn concerns from career officials.
This month, the Social Security Administration’s former acting commissioner
Michelle King stepped down from her role at
the agency after DOGE requested access to
Social Security recipient information, according to two people familiar with the official’s departure who were not authorized to
discuss the matter publicly.
Sen. Ron Wyden (D–Ore.) said in a statement that ‘‘a plan like this will result in
field office closures that will hit seniors in
rural communities the hardest.’’
Other news organizations, including The
American Prospect and The Washington
Post, have reported that half of the Social
Security Administration’s workforce could
be on the chopping block.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you. The article
that I won’t read out of generosity to
my dear friend that is presiding, but it
details in painful ways what these cuts
could mean to people in the country.
Just trying to move a little quicker
through my documents because I am
way behind.
The impact of these cuts—one of the
big places they are going to impact is
in rural America, already suffering so
much. There is a lot of sources that are
talking about the rural areas of our
Nation they are going to cut.
And I would like to enter into the
RECORD another Associated Press article entitled ‘‘New Social Security requirements pose barriers to rural communities without internet, transportation.’’ A new requirement where Social Security recipients go online or in
person to a field office to access key
benefits instead of just making a phone
call will be difficult for many people to
meet.
This is an article from March 22,
which can be found online at https://
abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/new-soci
al-security-rules-present-barriers-rural
-communities-120054669.
Thank you very much to the kind
friend who is up with me late—or early,
I should say.
One more article I want to ask for
the RECORD. I feel like I can take liberties with the Presiding Officer because I have known him for 20-plus
years, consider him a real friend. He
married up, and he is going to teach me
how to do that.
I guess I am not allowed to insult a
colleague on this. That is a violation of
rule 19, I think, but that is a joke.
But you did marry up. You know
that.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. I did.
Mr. BOOKER. So this is former Social Security officers who are speaking
out about what is happening. People
who worked at the Agency see what is
happening. Two former senior officials
at the Social Security Administration—one under a Democratic President, one under a Republican President—wrote this column published in
The Hill. The title of the column is
‘‘Social Security faces a crisis with
staff cuts, closures.’’
Again, these are folks from both
sides of the aisle yelling into the wilderness, hoping that more people will
understand what is happening to Social
Security, what these cuts in staff are
actually going to do to the quality of
life for millions of Americans who rely
on Social Security, disproportionately
impacting people that are living in
rural areas.
Red States, blue States, Republicans,
Democrats—this is not a normal time,
America. The bedrock commitment
made is being undermined by the most
powerful man in our country and the
richest man in the world.
The title of the article, ‘‘Social Security faces a crisis with staff cuts and
closures,’’ written by, again, somebody
who worked under a Republican, somebody who worked under a Democrat.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have that printed in the
RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
SOCIAL SECURITY FACES A CRISIS WITH STAFF
CUTS, CLOSURES
(By Jason Fichtner and Kathleen Romig)
The Social Security Administration is in
crisis, and people’s benefits are at risk.
We do not say this lightly. We both served
in senior roles at the Social Security Administration—one of us under a Democratic
president and the other under a Republican.
Both of us have decades of expertise on Social Security and related systems. We know
from experience that our Social Security
system is resilient and has overcome many
challenges. The administration of the programs Social Security delivers is in greater
danger now than ever before.
Over the last month, the Social Security
Administration has announced plans to cut
at least 7,000 staff and consolidate service delivery by closing six regional offices. According to the Trump administration’s acting Social Security commissioner, these cuts are
driven by Elon Musk’s Department of Government Efficiency.
The Social Security Administration was
already facing serious customer service challenges, even prior to these cuts. These sudden, seemingly indiscriminate cuts would
risk jeopardizing Americans’ access to the
benefits they have earned.
When Americans claim their benefits, or
want to resolve an issue, they have three options: Go to a field office, call Social Security’s 800 number or go online to SSA.gov.
These cuts will affect all three options. It
will mean lines around the block at field offices, even longer wait times on the already
overburdened 800 number, and possibly even
a slower, glitchier website.
Also, due to a newly announced policy,
millions of people won’t even have the option
to use the phone and will have to go to overcrowded field offices instead.
Compromising customer service and access
to benefits is more than an administrative
issue. It is a de facto cut to a program Americans across the political spectrum support
and rely on for financial security. Americans
VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:27 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.114 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1980 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
will find it far more stressful and time-consuming to access the Social Security benefits they’ve earned. Some may not be able to
claim benefits, or resolve issues, at all. People may have to wait on the phone for hours
to claim retirement benefits. Widows and
widowers with young children who just lost
their spouses may struggle to claim survivor
benefits.
These cuts will hit people with disabilities
hardest. Already, 30,000 Americans a year are
dying while waiting for a hearing on Social
Security Disability Insurance benefits,
which can take months or even years. These
cuts are likely to make that wait even
longer. Any one of us could get hit by a car
tomorrow and need those benefits as soon as
possible—not years from now.
Degraded customer service isn’t our only
concern. Due to the enormous loss of institutional knowledge and expertise from recent
staff departures and more to come, Social
Security may experience catastrophic system failures.
Social Security’s infrastructure is antiquated and complex. For example, key systems use COBOL, a programming language
developed in the 1950s and 1960s, with which
many computer engineers are unfamiliar. If
Social Security’s computer systems experience an outage, which has happened twice in
recent years, the agency may lack the expertise to resolve it.
Social Security has never missed a payment in its nearly 90 years. Unless Congress
acts soon, that could change in the near future. This is not a partisan issue. Democratic, Republican and independent voters
all greatly value and need Social Security.
In red states and blue states alike, Americans want access to their hard-earned benefits. The Trump administration’s own acting
Social Security commissioner has stated
publicly that the DOGE-led cuts could
‘‘break things,’’ and that the recent changes
are being effectuated by ‘‘outsiders who are
unfamiliar with nuances of SSA programs.’’
The Social Security commissioner from
President Trump’s first term has also raised
concerns, as have a growing array of Social
Security experts across the political spectrum.
We urge Republicans and Democrats in
Congress to work together to protect Social
Security. The time to act is now, when it is
still possible for the agency to reverse course
on at least some of the staff cuts and access
to sensitive data and systems. If members of
Congress wait any longer, they will soon find
their phone lines and district offices flooded
with furious constituents who can’t access
benefits. Service delivery delayed can turn
into service delivery denied if Congress
doesn’t stand up and act soon to prevent a
collapse of the Social Security Administration.
Mr. BOOKER. I want to end with
what I have been trying to do since I
started some, I think, about 8 hours
ago—yeah, 8 hours ago, I began. I want
to begin by doing what I said I was
going to do, is not just lift my voice
but lift the voice of New Jerseyans and
Americans. And so here are some
words.
This is one employee from New Jersey who contacted me to say that the
teleservice center has received many
calls from the public from New Jersey
to Georgia and other States. What they
all have in common is the fear of losing
their livelihood as a result of identification verification, in-person visits.
Seniors, disabled, and others that are
economically disadvantaged need a
voice, Senator BOOKER. And the voice I
hear all throughout the day from seniors are voices of fear. Please review
any policy of in-person identification
for the public.
A person from my State begging because they are hearing the fear of the
seniors that they pledged themselves
to serve.
Another Social Security employee
from New Jersey contacted me and
said:
I worked at Social Security for almost 19
years. I was approaching my 19 years in July.
However, I took the early-out retirement because there is a lot of uncertainty within the
agency.
The resignation of others also brings additional phone calls and workloads into the office. This adds additional stress and no additional bodies to handle the workloads. It also
provides poor, unfair service to the public.
Here is another story from a Social
Security employee in New Jersey:
I am a claims representative for our Social
Security field office. The most dramatic
changes I have noticed from our recent
change in operations is that our appointment calendar seems to be filling up more
quickly for simple post-entitlement changes
that were formerly handled over the phone.
This occupies appointment space for most
urgent and critical issues that would warrant an office visit.
We have identified verification protocols
already in place to keep identity thieves in
check. To the extent that some fraudsters
are still getting through requiring people to
come to our office and verify their identities
is obviously a less efficient solution to the
problem. A better solution to enhance security is to use two-step verification systems
and document fraud attempts in our technician dashboards so scammers can’t just shop
around for field offices to fool.
Regarding the in-person identifying policy,
I believe that it is causing more harm than
good. I’ve had claimants appearing in person
frantic that they will lose their benefits because of this.
My office lost four staff members. Two are
members of management. This is nothing
but chaos here. I can foresee more loss and
further decline and poor morale.
That is from a Social Security employee in my State describing what is
going on in their office.
Another New Jersey Social Security
worker:
I work in one of the smaller offices in New
Jersey, and we are currently combined with
another office that is undergoing renovations, which has caused the number of claimants coming into the office to double over
the last few months.
Although we do have extra staff because
the staff have been deployed to our location,
it doesn’t change the infrastructure of the
building, such as the number of desks available to do in-person interviews and provide
adequate waiting space for double the
amount of claimants. In our office, we only
have nine desks where we can interview the
public safely and use safety protocols. Three
of these are front windows where we can do
quick changes and six of them are where we
could do short interviews for benefit applications.
Right now, being that most interviews are


being done over the phone, we have over 20
people interviewing at a time now. Imagine
having to do these interviews in person. We
can only have six to nine interviews at a
time instead of 20-plus because there are
only six to nine desks available. This doesn’t
seem very efficient.
Maybe they should—too bad they
can’t call the Department of Government Efficiency, which caused the
problem.
Here is another Social Security
worker and their story:
Foot traffic in a field office on a daily
basis is already overwhelming. The public
coming in randomly to show their identity
would be a disadvantage for the elderly, people with vision issues, disabled, and someone
with no car.
This really hits home with me. My older
brother lost his right leg to diabetes, is legally blind, unable to drive. He called me
concerned about this, knowing there is no
way he can get to his field office and cannot
afford to lose his retirement. I am hoping
this is reconsidered.
Social Security is not a program; it
is a promise. We owe it to seniors and
working people who paid into Social
Security their whole lives to make
good on the promise of a secure retirement, not to attack Social Security, to
drive them to fear and worry, and when
they call for help, to put them on hold
for hours or drive them to offices that
may be closing or are overcrowded or
are unable to help our elders.
Does this sound like America at its
best? Does this sound like America
being made great again? This is outrageous. These are our elders. They deserve dignity, respect, and they deserve
their Social Security.
I am going to move on to the next
item, but I want to reiterate again that
I am determined to stand here as long
as I physically can. We are 8 hours into
it. Dozens and dozens of people—I read
their stories. As I have gone around the
country and I have gone around my
State, there is this growing anger and
rage and fear. There is chaos. There is
confusion.
They read the newspapers and see
that programs are helping them when
an unexpected disease or cancer or crisis hits them, and they see that a
bunch of folks are trying to figure out
how to cut $880 billion from things like
Medicaid.
The stories got me a little emotional
just because I am hearing about so
many people who—not to their fault,
not to their problem—are hit by a crisis, a challenge, an accident at work
are now sitting back and are going to
see what we do.
People have told us that their whole
delicate, fragile world works because
they have a transportation program
that could be on the blocks of cuts in
Medicaid or their home healthcare
worker or their medications.
Even while these big issues are being
discussed, we are seeing, as we have
been documenting here, again, from
Republicans and Democrats, how the
administration is already taking steps
to roll back programs, to seize funding
that people have used to access the
ACA or to lower their prescription drug
costs or that is funding the research
that we are competing with China on
through the NIH. Republicans and
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A31MR6.032 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1981
Democrats, we have read already, have
been saying: Hey, wait a minute, you
shouldn’t cut things that produce
money for your country in the long
term.
But now here is something that I
want to get into, which is education in
our Nation. I believe that genius is
equally distributed in the United
States. There are as many geniuses
being born in the wealthiest parts of
New Jersey and Pennsylvania as are
being born in the lowest incomes.
In a global knowledge-based economy, the most valuable natural resource any nation has is the genius of
its children. One genius—one Einstein,
one Madame Curie—one genius could
change humanity forever.
I hear the stories about China graduating more people in STEM than we
have total graduates in our entire
country. It is a global competition. If
we are to be this Nation that ANDY KIM
talked about where every generation
has the right as an American to expect
that the next generation will do better,
not worse, so much of this revolves
around what we all know: how important education is to a democracy especially—the best ideas, the best innovations, the best artists, innovators, entrepreneurs, scientists, doctors, teachers. We need to invest in the best pipeline possible.
But now, not with Congress, which
established the Department of Education, but by Executive fiat undermining separation of powers, the administration wants to dismantle,
defund, destroy the Department of
Education, scatter its responsibilities
across Agencies that themselves are
going through massive personnel cuts
and are not equipped to handle it.
This is ultimately about whether or
not we as a nation believe that every
child deserves an education. We should
organize ourselves to meet that calling. Our Nation’s children are that precious resource. One of the most noble
professions are people that teach our
children.
So let’s go right into it. At the signing ceremony to commemorate the establishment of the Department of Education, President Jimmy Carter said:
Today’s signing fulfills a longstanding personal commitment on my part. My first public office was as a county school board member. As a state senator and governor, I devoted much of my time to education issues.
I remain convinced education is one of the
most noblest enterprises a person or society
can undertake.
Pastor Carter also said that the Department of Education was created because education is so important to our
Nation’s future that it must have a robust level of national support.
Here is a letter I really wanted to
read. I am a member of a Baptist
church with the great Pastor Jefferson,
but I actually studied Torah. In my
Torah study with Rabbi Davidson,
when I heard about all these cuts in
the Department of Education, he wanted me to hear from a great rebbe,
Rebbe Menachem Schneerson, a
Lubavitch rebbe who in 1979 wrote a
letter not in support of religious
schools but wrote a letter in support of
public education, in support of the creation of a special Department of Education.
He wrote this letter in 1979. I was so
moved by it—thank you, Rabbi Davidson—I want to read it here.
This is the rebbe:
I am certain that you will agree that the
state of education in this country, as many
others, leaves much to be desired;—
He was not happy—
that the status quo (as reflected in juvenile
delinquency, [et cetera]) is far from satisfactory, and, what is worse, has been steadily
eroding; and that some determined nationwide effort is called for to upgrade the quality of public education in this resourceful
country.
I trust you will agree that such an enormous effort, which is surely in the highest
national interest, can come only from the
Federal government with the fullest cooperation of State, County and City.
In my view, a separate, adequately funded
Cabinet-level Department of Education, subject to legislative safeguards to ensure that
the traditional primacy of States and localities in education affairs would not be jeopardized, could well meet the challenge.
The main reasons why I support said proposal are as follows:
1. The creation of a distinct Cabinet-level
Department of Education would have a salutary impact on all who are involved in education, particularly parents, teachers, and
students. The very innovation of upgrading
the status of Education from that of an adjunct to, or division of, another national
agency, would pointedly underscore its proper place among the Nation’s priorities.
Look how prescient the rebbe was
and what he might say if he was alive
today.
2. The workshops of child education are the
school and the home. For various reasons,
which need not be discussed—
‘‘I am worried about the home,’’ he
basically says. Too much of school is
left to the streets.
Insofar as the street is concerned there is
very little we can do as things now stand.
More can be done, and needs to be done. . . .
But in the final analysis it is the public
school where the greatest improvement can
and must be achieved.
3. Among the factors that lie at the roots
of shortcomings of public education, two—in
my opinion—command primary attention:
One has to do with the general curriculum,
which should place much greater emphasis
on character building and moral and ethical
values. The other has to do with the quality
of teaching—by qualified, dedicated and motivating teachers. The latter point requires
the upgrading of teachers’ salaries on par
with comparable professions in other fields
of science and relieving them, as far as possible, of other frustrations and stresses.
I want to do a side note here. I am a
big believer that we should slash public
school professionals’ tax rates. We need
the best minds coming into the profession. Why not as a country say: If you
are going to take a job as a teacher—
which, unfortunately, pays too low in
our country—let’s do that instead of,
again, giving these massive tax cuts
disproportionately to the wealthiest in
our country.
The upgrading of the Nation’s educational
system will, of course, require considerable
Federal [investment]. But this is one area
where spending has built-in returns, not only
in the long term, but also in . . . immediate
gains in terms of diminishing expenditures
in the penal system, crime prevention, reduction in vandalism, drug abuse. . . . In the
longer term, it would also bring savings in
expenditure on health and welfare, and—one
may venture to say—even in the defense
budget, since a morally healthy, strong and
united nation is in itself a strong deterrent
against any enemy.
5. The creation of a separate Cabinet-level
Department of Education, as I understand it,
has been conceived not for the purpose of
merely improving administrative efficiency,
nor merely as coordinator of existing programs, or for similar technical reasons. The
main purpose is to breathe new life into the
whole educational system of this Nation, and
to involve the whole Nation, through its
Federal government, in this massive and
concerted effort. As such—I am convinced—
[a national Department of Education, Cabinet-level] deserves everybody’s support.
Thank you, rebbe.
Unfortunately, this administration
has not listened to the rebbes.
What does the Department of Education do, and how is this administration attacking it? Let me read you an
excerpt.
The New York Times: ‘‘Can Trump
Really Abolish the Department of Education?’’ March 20:
President Trump signed an executive order
on Thursday that directs the federal Department of Education to come up with a plan
for its own demise. Only Congress can abolish a Cabinet-level agency, and it is not clear
whether Mr. Trump has the votes in Congress to do so.
I will tell you, in the Senate, if he
needs 60 votes, he doesn’t.
But he has already begun to dismantle the
department, firing about half of its staff,
gutting its respected education-research
arm, and vastly narrowing the focus of its
civil rights division, which works to protect
students from discrimination.
Mr. Trump’s long history of attacking the
Department of Education represents a revival of a Reagan-era Republican talking
point. It has unified Democrats in fiery opposition.
Yeah.
But is shuttering the department possible?
And if not, how has Trump begun to use the
agency to achieve his policy goals?
What does the department do?
Founded in 1979, its main job is distributing money to college students through
grants and loans. It also sends federal money
to K–12 schools, targeted toward low-income
and disabled students, and enforces anti-discrimination laws.
The money for schools has been set aside
by Congress and is unlikely to be affected by
Mr. Trump’s executive order.
I don’t agree with the New York
Times because time and time again,
the money set aside by Congress is
being clawed back by the President
against the people that the Constitution of the United States of America
says has spending power.
Those federal dollars account for only
about 10 percent of K–12 school funding nationwide. While Mr. Trump has said he wants
to return power over education to the states,
states and school districts already control
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.088 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1982 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
K–12 education, which is mostly paid for
with state and local tax dollars. The federal
department does not control learning standards or reading lists.
The agency does play a big role in funding
and disseminating research on education,
but those efforts have been significantly
scaled back by the Trump administration.
It also administers tests to track whether
American students are learning and how
they compare with their peers in other
states and countries.
God forbid we measure people’s performances.
It is unclear whether those tests will continue to be delivered given the drastic reductions in the staff and funding necessary to
manage them.
Still, closing the department would not
likely have much of an immediate effect on
how schools and colleges operate. The Trump
administration has discussed tapping the
Treasury Department to disburse student
loans and grants, for instance, and Health
and Human Services to administer funding
for students with disabilities. . . . Any effort
to fully eliminate the department would
have to go through Congress. Republican
members would mostly hear opposition from
superintendents, college presidents, and
other education leaders in their school districts; schools in Republican regions rely on
federal aid from the agency, just as schools
in Democratic regions do.
‘‘They are going to run into opposition,’’
says Jon Valant, an education expert at the
Brookings Institution. ‘‘They have a laserthin majority and a filibuster to confront in
the Senate.’’
Even if congressional Republicans stuck
together . . . Dr. Valant predicts their constituents would protest, given the department’s role in distributing money in programs like Pell grants, which pay for college
tuition, and I.D.E.A., which provides support
to students with disabilities.
‘‘It’s a very hard sell. . . . I am . . . skeptical.’’
Efforts to eliminate the Department
threaten the enforcement of critical
laws. There is the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, which has supported school districts since 1965 in
low-income areas; the Individuals with
Disabilities Act, which ensures 7.5 million students with disabilities receive
an education; the Higher Education
Act, which helps more students afford
college; and title IX protections to
guard against sex discrimination. This
doesn’t just hurt our country, but undermining those resources for our students hurts generations to come.
I ask unanimous consent that the
New York Times article entitled
‘‘Trump Firings Gut Education Civil
Rights Division’’ be printed in the
RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
[Mar. 13, 2025]
TRUMP FIRINGS GUT EDUCATION
DEPARTMENT’S CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION
(By Michael C. Bender and Rachel Nostrant)
Decades ago, Congress guaranteed all students an equal opportunity to an education.
But now the office created to enforce that
promise has been decimated.
The Education Department’s Office for
Civil Rights was slashed in half on Tuesday
as part of President Trump’s aggressive push
to dismantle the agency, which he has called
a ‘‘con job.’’ The firings eliminated the entire investigative staff in seven of the office’s 12 regional branches, including in Boston, Cleveland, Dallas and San Francisco,
and left thousands of pending cases in limbo.
The layoffs struck every corner of the department, which manages federal loans for
college, tracks student achievement and supports programs for students with disabilities.
But education policy experts and student
advocates were particularly distressed about
the gutting of the civil rights office, which
fielded more than 22,600 complaints from parents and students last year, an increase of
more than 200 percent from five years earlier.
Some voiced particular concern about
what could happen to students with special
needs, whose access to education is often left
to the federal government to enforce. Many
questioned how the Trump administration
would be able to handle the office’s case load
moving forward—or if it would at all.
‘‘The move to gut this office and leave only
a shell means the federal government has
turned its back on civil rights in schools,’’
said Catherine E. Lhamon, who led the office
as assistant secretary for civil rights in both
the Obama and Biden administrations. ‘‘I am
scared for my kids and I am scared for every
mother with kids in school.’’
The Office for Civil Rights, established by
Congress, opened along with the rest of the
Education Department in 1980. One of the office’s first leaders was Clarence Thomas, now
a Supreme Court justice. It is relatively inexpensive compared with other agency programs, with a cost of about $140 million in
the department’s $80 billion discretionary
budget.
The majority of civil rights complaints
typically involve students with disabilities,
followed by allegations of racial and sexbased discrimination. Many of the disability
cases involve complaints that schools are
failing to provide accommodations for students or that schools are separating disabled
students from their peers in violation of federal law.
Mr. Trump and the education secretary,
Linda McMahon, have maintained that staffing cuts at the department will not disrupt
services for the 50 million pupils in elementary and secondary schools or 20 million college students.
But the only preparation the Trump administration announced before the layoffs
was that the department’s Washington-based
headquarters would be closed on Wednesday
as a security precaution.
‘‘We’ll see how it all works out,’’ Mr.
Trump said of the layoffs while speaking to
reporters at the White House.
Madi Biedermann, the Education Department’s deputy assistant for communications,
said changes were underway in the civil
rights office to process cases and praised the
remaining staff members for their commitment and years of experience.
‘‘We are confident that the dedicated staff
of O.C.R. will deliver on its statutory responsibilities,’’ she said.
One civil rights investigator wept in an
interview on Wednesday as she spoke about
the abrupt firings and what they would mean
for parents fighting for fairness for their
children.
This investigator, who requested anonymity out of fear of retribution, had talked to
parents on Tuesday morning about a possible
resolution to a yearslong push to have their
disabled son’s needs met at school.
In the afternoon, the investigator prepared
a new case about a school retaliating against
a Black student who had complained about
racial slurs from classmates and reviewed an
offer from another school to resolve a complaint from a student whose wheelchair had
been repeatedly stuck—and occasionally
tipped over—from crumbling walkways on
campus.
In the evening, the investigator was fired.
With work access cut off, there was no way
to follow up with any of the parents she had
spoken with that day, or to contact the witnesses she was scheduled to interview on
Wednesday about a college student’s discrimination complaint.
‘‘I was really trying to help, and now I
can’t even talk to them, and I’m so sorry,’’
the investigator said. ‘‘I would never treat
anyone like this. I would never just not show
up or stop talking to someone, but I have no
way to reschedule or let them know what’s
going on.’’
Disability rights advocates said that any
impediment to the department’s ability to
enforce civil rights laws would cause widespread harm to the nation’s education system.
Zoe Gross, the director of advocacy for the
Autism Self Advocacy Network, said that
she was particularly concerned about what
might happen to the office’s data collection
efforts, which have been used to spot potential red flags and identify trends.
For example, when some states reported
zero instances of disabled students who had
been restrained or separated from their
peers, O.C.R. investigated and found that
cases were not being reported because school
officials had misinterpreted rules for disabled students. The federal government then
intervened.
‘‘All of these kinds of things you need the
department to do and help with,’’ Ms. Gross
said. ‘‘And without the Department of Education and the Office for Civil Rights, we’re
going to see basically states left on their
own to navigate that.’’
Many of the office’s past cases have served
as catalysts for broader change.
During the Obama administration, the office’s investigations into sexual assault and
harassment identified more than 100 colleges
and universities that were inadequately reporting and responding to allegations.
As a result, many schools adopted internal
enforcement policies that have made it easier for students who have been sexually assaulted to receive large damage awards.
These investigations have also been routinely referred to as validation for the collegiate #MeToo movement.
Sex-based cases also include harassment
involving gender identity, an issue that
fueled Mr. Trump’s campaign last year and
motivated executive orders early in his administration aimed at preventing schools
from recognizing transgender identities, barring transgender girls and women from competing on girls’ and women’s sports teams
and terminating programs that promote
‘‘gender ideology.’’
Restrictions during the coronavirus pandemic led to their own genre of discrimination complaints as schools closed, struggled
to carry out online learning and then were
slow to reopen.
Department officials said they still intend
to pursue civil rights complaints and have
discussed relying more on mediations as a
way to quicken the pace of investigations, as
well as other available legal tools to rapidly
resolve cases.
The office had already moved to align with
Mr. Trump’s priorities. It paused ongoing investigations into complaints of schools banning books and dismissed 11 pending cases
involving schools that had removed books
from their libraries. The cases primarily
delved into issues of gender and racial identity.
Under the Biden administration, the office
vigorously investigated complaints of racial
discrimination amid the so-called racial
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.090 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1983
reckoning in the aftermath of the death of
George Floyd. Some complaints reflected the
debate about schools’ roles in addressing systemic racism or charged that certain programming was exclusionary of non-minorities. Several longstanding diversity and inclusion efforts—which Mr. Trump has now
ordered ‘‘illegal’’ and ‘‘harmful’’—came
under a microscope.
The civil rights office has also seen a rise
in allegations of antisemitism, particularly
on college campuses, and other religiousbased discrimination. The Trump administration has supported those investigations,
which they have used to strip federal funding
from one university and threaten dozens
more with similar consequences.
Before firing 1,315 employees on Tuesday,
the Trump administration had already encouraged 572 workers to quit or retire early
and had let go 63 employees who did not have
union protections.
Taken together, 47 percent of the department’s work force had been eliminated in the
first 50 days of Mr. Trump’s return to the
White House.
Mr. BOOKER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that ‘‘How Education Department Cuts Could Hurt
Low-Income and Rural Schools in Particular,’’ an article of March 21, 2025, be
printed in the RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
[Mar. 21, 2025]
HOW THE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT CUTS
COULD HURT LOW-INCOME AND RURAL SCHOOLS
(By Jonaki Mehta)
President Trump’s efforts to shutter the
U.S. Department of Education are in full
swing.
On Thursday, he signed an executive action instructing U.S. Secretary of Education
Linda McMahon to ‘‘take all necessary steps
to facilitate the closure of the Department of
Education,’’ and to do so ‘‘to the maximum
extent appropriate and permitted by law.’’
Before that, the department had already
announced it was shrinking its workforce by
nearly half, with cuts to all divisions.
On Thursday, President Donald Trump
signed an executive action to begin dismantling the U.S. Department of Education.
Meanwhile, the administration has promised that ‘‘formula funding’’ for schools,
which is protected by law, would be preserved. That includes flagship programs like
Title I for high-poverty schools, and the
Rural Education Achievement Program
(REAP), which sends money to rural and
low-income schools.
But nearly all the statisticians and data
experts who work in the office responsible
for determining whether schools qualify for
that money will soon be out of jobs, making
it unclear how such grants would remain intact.
At the start of the year, the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) employed more than 100 people. On Friday, all
but three employees will be placed on administrative leave, and eventually laid off.
That’s according to multiple NCES employees, who asked that their names not be used
because they feared retaliation for speaking
out. An internal email obtained by NPR also
confirmed how many staff would remain.
‘‘That will have an absolutely devastating
impact,’’ says Matthew Gardner Kelly, who
studies the country’s K–12 funding systems
at the University of Washington. Since 1867,
NCES has been a central, reliable source of
information that helps educators, researchers and the public understand the state of
education in the United States.
Gardner Kelly says the loss of NCES staff
will hit low-income schools especially hard.
‘‘It’s not just that loss of information, it’s
what will happen to a school district’s budget in the absence of funds that can’t be allocated without the necessary staff at NCES.’’
NPR reached out to the Department of
Education for comment and did not hear
back.
The federal government only provides a
fraction of the money that goes to schools—
states and local governments are responsible
for the lion’s share of that funding. But the
federal government plays an outsize role in
helping high-needs schools get the money
they need to stay afloat.
Congress established Title I to provide
money to K–12 schools in low-income communities. In the current fiscal year, the Department of Education set aside more than
$18.38 billion for Title I. Nearly 90% of U.S.
school districts benefit from the program,
which has historically enjoyed bipartisan
support among lawmakers.
The Rural Education Achievement Program (REAP) awards money to low-income
and rural school districts. More than a quarter of the country’s public schools are in
rural areas. And while REAP is a fraction of
the size of Title I—$215 million for the current year—Amy Price Azano of Virginia
Tech’s Center for Rural Education says those
dollars stretch much further in rural communities.
‘‘We work with school districts that have
10 people in a graduating class. So when
you’re talking about enough money to get
the one student who needed a paraprofessional to walk across that stage,’’ a little bit
goes a long way.
These federal grants can pay for things
like school staff salaries, supplies, technology, tutoring programs and a range of
basic services that low-income schools may
not otherwise be able to afford.
NCES employees told NPR that the cuts to
the Education Department likely won’t impact REAP or Title I grants for the 2025–26
school year, but the fate of these grants beyond that seems incredibly uncertain.
For grants that go to rural schools through
the REAP program, NCES plays a direct role
in creating the relevant data and providing
assistance to local school leaders.
But by the end of the day on Friday, all
but three NCES staffers will be locked out of
their computers and on administrative leave.
‘‘The key issue is that—as things stand
now—the data needed to drive the next
round of Title I, and grants to rural schools,
and grants to other programs, isn’t going to
happen as a result of the cuts to NCES staff
and contracts,’’ said one former NCES employee.
Several employees told NPR that, after the
layoffs, it is unlikely the REAP program will
be able to get money to schools for the 2026–
27 school year.
The same goes for Title I, with an added
challenge: The Trump administration is
poised to shrink the ranks of the Census Bureau. A reduction in its staff could further
complicate the distribution of Title I funding.
Thursday’s executive action lays out the
Trump administration’s goal of returning
‘‘authority over education to the States and
local communities.’’
But one of the key benefits of grants like
Title I and REAP is that while the federal
government, including NCES, determines
which school districts are eligible, it is ultimately up to local leaders to decide how best
to use that money.
NCES staff also provide expertise, oversight and guidance to ensure those leaders
have what they need to plan budgets effectively for each school year.
William Sonnenberg, who is now retired,
spent nearly five decades working on Title I
for NCES until 2022.
‘‘I don’t think it’s an exaggeration to say
in a given year, I would get thousands of
calls from local superintendents or other
kinds of people at the school district or at
the state level in Title I offices, asking for
guidance,’’ he says.
One NCES employee said, ‘‘Everyone acknowledges three people cannot come anywhere close to fulfilling statutory obligations.’’
Without data oversight and guidance from
NCES, Sonnenberg worries federal grant
money may not reach the low-income students who need it most.
Rural education expert Amy Price Azano
says, while rural schools are used to having
fewer resources, the loss of REAP funds will
strain them even more.
‘‘They’re doing more with less anyway.
And so the risk now is that they will have to
be even more resilient. They will have to do
even more with even less.’’
Mr. BOOKER. Again, rural communities are really taking a hit.
If I can give disability rights
testimonials: Gutting the Department
of Education will be devastating for
students with disabilities. Right now,
the Department of Education—the Individuals with Disabilities Act guarantees more than 7 million students in
America the right to a free, appropriate public education. It ensures
that—it provides services like speech
therapies, counseling, and personalized
learning plans. Without Federal oversight, these protections could disappear; schools could delay evaluations, cut corners, or deny support altogether for parents.
Consider Kathryn, a resident of
Westwood, NJ, right by Harrington
Park, where I grew up. Kathryn has 7-
year-old twin boys who receive special
services. They currently attend an outof-school-district specialized program
but are very much a part of the
Westwood Regional School District and
may even one day transition back into
the school.
In her words:
The Department of Education plays a critical role in enforcing the IDEA and ensuring
that students with disabilities receive the
accommodations and support they need to
succeed. Without this oversight, many students risk losing essential services, widening
existing gaps and disparities, and they will
face greater barriers to academic success and
reaching their highest potential.
This is not a partisan issue; it is a
matter of assuring that all students,
regardless of ability, have equal access
to education.
Her story is one of thousands of parents, educators, and advocates across
the country who are standing up for
children’s rights to an equitable education. Kathryn’s family is for her
boys, and every child deserves a fair
shot at success. Their fight for inclusive education is essential.
Here is Ashley from Wayne, NJ, who
knows firsthand how important the Department of Education’s funding is.
Her daughter, who is legally blind, relies on Bookshare—an online learning
tool—that provides successful materials to students with print disabilities
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A31MR6.031 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1984 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
at no cost to schools or families. Without it, her daughter would be left behind.
As Ashley put it:
This is a service she absolutely needs in
order to access information that regularly
sighted people do not even have to think
about. Cutting programs like this isn’t just
irresponsible; it would be cruel.
Kimberly from Dumont, NJ, the
mother of twin boys with nonverbal
level 3 autism:
They attend an amazing school in Nutley
because of IDEA. Without it, their future
would be uncertain.
In her own words, she says:
It was not long ago that kids like them
would have had to have been institutionalized. Now they are able to have a beautiful
life and go to school. I am terrified of the future if IDEA is eliminated. I am begging you.
Please consider families like mine.
Kimberly, I see you.
Michelle from New Jersey shares this
fear. Her daughter, who has
neurofibromatosis, who is 1—excuse
me—and has apraxia, depends on inclass support to succeed. She knows
firsthand how essential the Department of Education is in protecting students with disabilities.
These are her words:
Gutting, weakening, and ultimately closing the Department of Education is disastrous and dangerous for the disabled students who depend upon it.
She reminds us that education is a
civil right and that laws like the IDEA
and section 504 ensure that students
with disabilities receive the support
they need to succeed.
Alana from my State is deeply concerned about her 20-year-old son, who
depends on the protections of section
504 to have a fair shot at the future.
Her 10-year-old child with autism relies
on these protections every single day.
She is asking for help because, as she
put it, ‘‘Section 504 and its rules are
very important to the disability community. We need your help to save it.’’
Roger, who is a grandfather from
New Jersey, is also pleading for action.
His granddaughter has relied on a 504
plan since the seventh grade and will
continue to need it as she applies to
college. He raises the essential question: Which programs are directly helping students? The answer is clear: Laws
like IDEA, IEP, and section 504. They
are not luxuries; they are lifelines.
Again, this is not about politics, and,
as we see from various writings, people
from both sides of the aisle are worried
and concerned.
I ask unanimous consent that this article from one of the publications in
my State—‘‘What happens to special
education programs in New Jersey if
Trump shuts down the Department of
Education?’’ by Gene Myers—be printed in the RECORD.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
[Mar. 21, 2025]
WHAT HAPPENS TO SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS IN NJ IF TRUMP SHUTS DOWN THE
DEPT. OF ED?
(By Gene Myers)
President Donald Trump’s drive to shut
down the U.S. Education Department could
reverberate through one community in New
Jersey like few others: students and families
who rely on special education programs for
children with disabilities.
While the federal department has limited
involvement in funding and standards for the
general education population, it administers
$15 billion a year that helps pay for classes,
therapies and other resources for special education. It’s also the chief enforcer of laws
that guarantee students with disabilities the
right to a public education tailored to their
needs.
The Trump administration has promised to
preserve those functions in other parts of the
government. But in New Jersey, advocates
have raised alarms about shifting back to an
era when state and local government often
shortchanged the education of their most
vulnerable students.
‘‘Families are terrified. Educators are worried,’’ said Peg Kinsell, policy director at
SPAN Parent Advocacy Network in Newark,
which works with the disability community.
‘‘Nobody knows what’s happening next, and
that’s a scary place to be.’’
Trump on Thursday signed an executive
order that seeks to eliminate the DOE, two
weeks after letting go about half the department’s staff. The move is likely to set up another legal challenge testing the bounds of
Trump’s power, with critics arguing the
president can’t shut down the agency without approval by Congress.
Harrison Fields, White House principal
deputy press secretary, said in a statement
to USA TODAY that the order ‘‘will empower parents, states, and communities to
take control and improve outcomes for all
students.’’ He said recent test scores on the
National Assessment of Educational
Progress exam ‘‘reveal a national crisis—our
children are falling behind.’’
Federal funding for students with disabilities under the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act, Title I funding for low-income schools and federal student loan payments will remain unchanged under the
order while Education Secretary Linda
McMahon works on a plan to ‘‘bring these
funds closer to states, localities, and more
importantly, students,’’ a White House official said.
About 7.5 million students rely on special
education services in the U.S. The number
has nearly doubled since the 1976–77 school
year, the year after the IDEA was adopted
and declared that schools had a legal responsibility to provide a ‘‘fair and appropriate’’
public education to students with disabilities.
New Jersey is home to one of the largest
such populations in the country, according
to Rutgers University’s New Jersey State
Public Policy Lab. Among Garden State public school students, 18%, about 240,000 in
total, are served under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act, according to the
Lab.
New Jersey’s proposed 2026 budget anticipates $457.7 million in federal funding allocated to local school districts for special
education services. At the local level, the
money pays for staff as well as occupational
and physical therapies and services required
by students’ individual education plans, according to the federal Education Department.
While it’s still early, advocates say a sharp
reduction in federal staff could weaken enforcement of IDEA and other disability
rights laws and jeopardize funding and oversight.
Who’ll enforce civil rights laws?
The Department plays a role in enforcing
civil rights protections under IDEA and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, a 1973 law
that prohibits discrimination based on disability in programs receiving federal funding. Under the legislation, schools are required to provide equal access to education
through accommodations such as extended
time limits for tests and accessible transportation .
Kinsell said that handing enforcement
back to the states would be a dangerous step
backward.
‘‘Giving it back to the states brings us
down a really dark path,’’ she said. ‘‘Before
IDEA was passed in 1975, many states simply
refused to educate kids with disabilities.
They segregated them, or didn’t let them attend school at all.’’
Before the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act was enacted, just one in five
children with disabilities were taught in public schools, the federal DOE says on its
website.
Dismantling the department would fulfill a
goal long sought by the political right. The
Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington, D.C.-based think tank, contends that
education policy should be made by states
and local communities, not the federal government. The federal agency adds a layer of
expensive bureaucracy that doesn’t directly
educate students, the Foundation’s Jonathan
Butcher and Lindsey Burke argued in a
paper last summer.
Local control would allow for more innovation and flexibility in how education is delivered, they added, arguing the DOE imposes a
one-size-fits-all solution that often doesn’t
suit local needs.
But the National Education Association,
the union that represents 3 million teachers
and other educational professionals in the
U.S., cautions that without the department’s
oversight, inequities in special education
services across states could grow significantly.
States already vary in how they implement IDEA, but federal monitoring helps ensure some consistency, the Association said.
Without that safeguard, some states, especially those with tight budgets, might restrict eligibility or cut services, the NEA
said in a statement.
Some Republicans would like to see federal
education funding turned into block grants,
in which states would get a lump sum to
spend as they choose. Kinsell worries that
would undermine services further for disabled students.
‘‘Right now, IDEA funds are designated for
special education students,’’ she said. ‘‘If it’s
block-granted, states could take that money
and spend it on something else, like building
a gym, instead of serving kids with disabilities.’’
In addition to funding and legal enforcement, the Education Department collects
and monitors data on how schools serve students with disabilities, tracking issues such
as disproportionate discipline and lack of inclusion. Without DOE leadership, Kinsell
said, such problems could go unchecked.
Cuts could affect not just enforcement but
also vital programs like technical assistance, professional development and research,
she argued. ‘‘There’s a lot of parts of the law
beyond enforcement—training, curriculum
development, research—that help states implement appropriate education,’’ Kinsell
said. ‘‘If those are gone, the whole system
suffers.’’
Further complicating matters, Kinsell
said, are proposals to split up existing federal offices. ‘‘They’re talking about moving
VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:27 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.092 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1985
the Office for Civil Rights to the Justice Department, disability programs to Health and
Human Services, and vocational rehab to the
Department of Labor,’’ she said. ‘‘That
would scatter programs that need to work
together.’’
While no one knows what’s next, Kinsell
said she expects that reducing or eliminating
the department will have real impacts on
families.
‘‘The state of confusion is palpable—for advocates, for families, for educators,’’ she
said. ‘‘It’s like watching the floor get pulled
out from under everyone who relies on these
supports.’’
Mr. BOOKER. I want to say something about student loans too.
The Department of Education is also
responsible for operating the $1.6 trillion Federal student loan program,
which benefits 42.7 million borrowers in
America, and it allows students to access higher education—something that
is shown unequivocally to strengthen
our economy.
This administration plans to move
student loan funding to the Small
Business Administration—a plan that
even some of my Republican colleagues
in Congress have expressed serious concerns about.
Here is an article: ‘‘Republicans hesitant to stand behind Trump’s plan for
student loans.’’
Although SBA . . . managed a wealth of
COVID relief programs, it normally runs a
much smaller operation than [the] student
debt [program].
President . . . Trump has yet to win over
his own party with his push to ‘‘immediately’’ transfer the Education Department’s massive student loan operation to another agency slated for deep staff cuts.
Trump was expected to propose moving the
agency’s $1.6 trillion portfolio to the Treasury Department—a concept long-discussed
on Capitol Hill and suggested in Project 2025,
The Heritage Foundation’s conservative policy blueprint. Instead, the president announced this month that the [SBA] would
get it, surprising many lawmakers and conservatives who track the issue.
Although the SBA, which provides financial support to companies for disaster relief,
training and other needs, managed a wealth
of COVID relief programs, it normally runs a
much smaller operation than student debt. It
is also slated to lose 43 percent of its staff.
Now . . . Republicans are worried about
the size of the debt and the staffing needed
to manage the complex system of servicers,
borrowers, and loan applications. And with
about 43 million borrowers—and a record
number of them starting to fall behind on
their payments since the pandemic-era hiatus ended in 2023—transferring this work
may be one of the most challenging hurdles
for unwinding the agency President Trump
has pledged to close.
‘‘A lot of us were thinking it would go to
Treasury. We are talking about the huge nature of student loans,’’ House Education and
Workforce Chair Tim Walberg said in an
interview. ‘‘They have much larger staffing
capabilities right now than the SBA, but the
president may have something specific in
mind that I’m not aware of.’’
Early legislation from Senator Mike
Rounds . . . aimed at dismantling the Education Department also recommended the
Treasury Department for the job. And at a
recent House Rules Committee meeting,
Walberg suggested that moving the portfolio
to the SBA—which likely requires an act of
Congress to complete—might not be ‘‘permanent.’’ Some Republican lawmakers have
been hesitant to say the move is official.
Neither the Education Department’s Federal Aid office, which manages the loan program, nor SBA have provided a timeline or
detailed plans to move the portfolio. But
Education Department officials skeptical of
Trump’s SBA plan met the week after his announcement to discuss if the Treasury Department should manage this massive portfolio instead of the SBA, according to a person granted anonymity to discuss the matter.
Some conservatives are concerned about
the SBA’s lack of experience with colleges
and universities and the time crunch its staff
will be under to learn the complex student
loan system.
The plan to move the portfolio ‘‘sounds
rushed, it sounds like no one has been briefed
on it, and it is not clear what the purpose
is,’’ said Jason Delisle, who served on the
Education Department’s review group on
Trump’s presidential transition team.
FSA largely works with direct loans,
meaning that instead of a bank lending the
money, the Education Department disburses
the funds directly to the institution in the
student’s name. Colleges and universities,
however, aren’t on the hook if the loan isn’t
repaid—the borrower is.
SBA only started working with direct
loans at a massive scale in the aftermath of
the pandemic.
‘‘They’re laying off 43 percent of the SBA
staff at the same time [SBA is] being handed
a $1.6 trillion portfolio that is three times
the size of what they have,’’ said Michael
Negron, who worked on small business and
student loans for the National Economic
Council during the Biden administration.
The administration has not clearly stated
whether FSA workers who have expertise on
the student debt system would be transferred
to the SBA, which is a concern for Negron.
That doesn’t mean it’s impossible. SBA
could be a good fit, he said, but the conditions need to be right.
‘‘There is a world where this could
work,’’ he said optimistically. He is
now a fellow at Groundwork Collaborative, a leftwing think tank.
The White House did not acknowledge
questions about how it would transfer.
‘‘President Trump is doing everything he
can within his executive authority to dismantle the Department of Education and return education back to the states while safeguarding critical functions for students and
families,’’ press secretary Karoline Leavitt
said in a statement. The President has always said Congress has a role to play in this
effort, and we expect him to help the President deliver.
You know, that sounds like a President who doesn’t care about Congress,
who cares about what he is trying to
do. He hasn’t approached this in an intelligent way, making grand statements and opinions without considering the Department you are transferring loans to might actually be incapable, with a severely diminished staff, of
doing the job.
Here is an incredible article by
Fareed Zakaria about what is really
going on and how it affects the United
States, especially relative to other nations:
There is no area in which the United
States’ global dominance is more total than
higher education. With about 4 percent of
the world’s population and 25 percent of its
gross domestic product, America has 72 percent of the world’s 25 top universities by one
ranking and 64 percent by another. But this
crucial U.S. competitive advantage is being
undermined by the Trump administration’s
war on colleges. Hat tip to the New York
Times’s Michelle Goldberg for raising this
issue as well.
‘‘We have to honestly and aggressively attack the universities in this country. . . .
The professors are the enemy,’’ said JD
Vance during a speech to the National Conservatism Conference in 2021. The administration has put those words into action. The
most dramatic assault has been financial: a
freezing or massive reduction in research
grants and loans from the federal government. Some of these efforts are under court
review, but the cumulative impact could be
billions of dollars in cuts to basic research,
much of it disrupting ongoing projects and
programs.
High quality research in the United States
has emerged in a unique ecosystem. The federal government provides much of the funding through prominent institutions such as
the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation. Private foundations and companies account for most of the
rest. Professors at universities, both public
and private, use these funds to conduct the
research. No other country has a system that
works as well. What is at risk now is what
Holden Thorp, the editor in chief of the
Science family of journals, calls, ‘‘the social
contract that the federal government and institutions have had to enable the scientific
research enterprise in America in the last 80
years.’’
That is what is at risk.
Take Duke University, which ranked No.
11 in total grants received from NIH last
year. Of its $1.33 billion research budget, $863
million came from Washington, according to
the [AP]. That includes funds for critical research projects on cancer and other diseases
but also support[s] . . . more than 630 PhD
students at the medical school. If the cuts go
through, those projects and students will
have to be pared back substantially. Just on
Thursday, Johns Hopkins . . . announced
huge layoffs, saying it would let go of more
than 2,000 employees after losing $800 million
in federal grants.
One crucial mechanism to cut funding is
through a massive reduction in the overhead,
or indirect, costs that universities get reimbursed for by the federal government. Overhead often makes up 40 percent or 50 percent
of a grant, but last month, NIH ordered that
it be capped at 15 percent. [That] sounds
more rational than it is. Universities divide
their costs on science grants into research
costs (the salaries of the professors and graduate students) and overhead (the costs of the
buildings, labs, energy and utilities and administrative staff). When you are building a
complex lab to conduct experiments, the
structure and equipment is often far more
costly than the salaries and stipends of the
researchers. Michigan State University has
declared that these cuts could make it stop
construction of a $330 million research building for cancer, cardiovascular disease and
neuroscience studies.
Government funding plays a unique role
[in America]. It often supports basic research, the kind that companies have less incentive to do, and its results cannot be
hoarded by any one company but rather are
provided free to the entire scientific and
technological community so that all can use
it to experiment and innovate.
It is an American system that has
reaped billions and billions of dollars
in rewards to our economy.
The mapping of the human genome cost
less than $3 billion and took 13 years. Because it was government-funded, one of its
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A31MR6.034 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1986 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
key requirements was that the research
should be made publicly available for all
within 24 hours of being generated.
The other assault on the universities is a
strange new attack on free speech.
Fareed writes:
It began from a principled critique that bureaucracies, universities and elites had all
become too woke. But the government’s response to this problem has been Orwellian,
searching through these institutions for any
mentions of the words ‘‘diversity’’ or ‘‘identity’’ or ‘‘inclusion’’ and then shutting down
those programs without any review. Worse,
it now punishes universities for having on
their campuses people who might espouse
certain views on topics like Israel and Palestine—and now is punishing the protesters
themselves. I have long argued that universities have a huge problem: They have far
too little intellectual and ideological diversity—which is the most important kind of diversity on a campus. But the way you fix
that is not to restrict radical left-wing
speech but to add voices and views from
other parts of the spectrum. The answer to
censorship by the left is not censorship by
the right.
The fury with which the Trump administration has turned on academia resembles
nothing so much as the early days of the
Cultural Revolution, when an increasingly
paranoid Mao Zedong smashed China’s established universities, a madness that took generations [in China] to remedy. Meanwhile, in
Beijing last week, the Chinese government
announced its intention to massively increase its funding for research and technology so that it could lead the world in
science in the 21st century. So, as America
appears to be copying the worst aspects of
China’s recent history, China is copying the
best aspects of America’s, striving to take
the edge [away from] . . . the United States
[as though we are going] through [our] . . .
own cultural revolution.
Learn from the fascists in China.
Fareed’s article is over. This is me
now.
Learn from the fascists in China and
don’t do what the Chinese did. What
America has done to lead humanity in
the sciences, in innovation, in research, in breakthroughs, in science—
we are the global model. And one administration, in 71 days, has our best
universities cutting the number of
Ph.D. students they bring in, cutting
the research that they are doing, cutting the planned development of research buildings. This is insanity, insanity.
We are America. Why is the President of the United States attacking the
science and the research at the top universities on planet Earth, bullying
them, undermining them?
I have had universities from my
State. I have had universities from my
neighboring State—not Connecticut,
New York. And I have had my college,
Stanford, come to see me—top researchers. The academic community—
not the political community, not the
history majors, not the political scientists, not the literature students, not
the Af-Am departments—the scientists
of America have been coming to the
Senate to say: What the heck? What is
going on? How could you take America’s edge, America’s advantage, America’s strength, America’s brilliance and
undercut it in 71 days of your administration?
We are killing the golden goose.
Why? Because we have a President who
is taking money that we already approved—the article I branch of government—and claiming that he could claw
it back, all on some trumped-up charge
that these institutions are too woke.
The solution to that is not to cut
science funding.
This should make people mad. But
more importantly, it should make people stand up and not be bystanders and
wait until we lose our edge because our
adversaries globally are smiling as we
destroy our institutions, from Duke to
Rutgers, to the University of Michigan,
to Berkeley, to Stanford.
This is madness. This is insanity—
and one of a dozen reasons why we are
going through this, a dozen reasons
why I am standing here, that we should
not be doing things normally. If we are
complicit in what Trump is doing—I
am hearing it not from political people
but from scientists who show up in my
office from Cornell, medical researchers who show up in my office from our
research hospitals in New Jersey and
are saying—they are not political.
They are just saying: What the heck?
You are undermining the research of
today that will affect the breakthroughs 5 years from now, 10 years
from now.
What is China doing while we are
doing this? They are investing in
record numbers, record levels. The
country of Tiananmen Square, cracking down on college students, is now
trying to act like America, while
America is acting more like them because our President is violating the
separation of powers, taking away the
money we approved. And we are letting
it happen by doing things normally
here and not holding one hearing.
Here is another example of what
Fareed was talking about. It is an article entitled: ‘‘Graduate student admissions paused and cut back as universities react to Trump orders on research.’’ Again, this is not from a political magazine. It is not from the New
York Times or the Washington Post or
the Wall Street Journal. This is from
STAT News. When did science become
political?
Acceptances for biomedical graduate students and postdoctoral scholars are being cut
back at some universities and medical centers across the country as many grapple with
the potential impact of the Trump administration’s order to cut National Institutes of
Health research funding.
That paragraph alone should have
people—all in this Chamber—upset.
Let’s just give European universities,
Australian universities, Canadian universities, Chinese universities a leg up
because we are going to cut the number
of graduate students and postdoctoral
students. The geniuses in our country
will have less opportunity.
The cuts come even as the proposed reductions to funding for overhead expenses, set to
start Feb. 10, were temporarily halted last
week by a federal judge, at least until a
court hearing this Friday. Universities appear to be exercising caution, with some
freezing positions and not taking new applications, or accepting fewer students than
normal, according to interviews, public announcements, and internal emails obtained
by STAT. The abrupt narrowing of training
opportunities is leaving many future researchers at the start of their scientific journey in limbo.
The academic calendar runs to the rhythm
of its own seasons; right now is typically the
time of year when offer letters for Ph.D. programs and postdoc positions in labs start
hitting inboxes. Universities and academic
medical centers were in the thick of that
process when the NIH—
Under President Donald Trump—
policy about overhead costs, known as indirect costs, landed.
‘‘This couldn’t be worse timing for doing
this,’’ said Waverly Ding, an associate professor at the University of Maryland who
studies the biomedical sciences workforce.
‘‘It’s creating a jolt in the market that is
going to be disabling for labs, especially the
smaller ones, because they won’t have the
human capital to do their science. It’s also
going to create chaos for Ph.D.s. It’s going to
be a cascading kind of chain effect through
the entire ecosystem.’’
I know we don’t read science—actually, we have a few doctors in here that
do—but look at the alarm that they
are sounding that this is not normal.
The slowdown is happening at some universities and not at others; some students may
be unaware of the issue as they anxiously
await acceptance letters without fully understanding the role national politics is
playing in those decisions. Some faculty are
grappling with admissions that are paused
and then unpaused, while others say they are
receiving little information or guidance from
leadership.
At the University of Southern California—
And as a former Stanford football
player, it is hard for me to talk about
USC. I had to jab them, Senator MURPHY.
At the University of Southern California,
faculty in some departments were told last
week to pause admissions, and not formalize
offers to students—even those who had visited and been given verbal acceptances. ‘‘The
awkward part is that we already told these
applicants that they were provisionally accepted and invited them to an in-person recruitment day; many have already purchased
flight + hotel reservations’’—
I mean, that is just cruel—
one professor said in a faculty discussion
list-serve observed by STAT.
I know Senator MURPHY hangs out in
faculty discussion list-serves.
That pause on admissions, in psychology,
was lifted this week, STAT was told.
Jennifer Unger, a professor who runs a doctoral program in health behavior research in
the department of population and public
health sciences at the University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, said
Wednesday she was still not able to admit
the six graduate students her department
had accepted after a visit day on Feb. 3.
‘‘We had just flown them out, we told them
we love you, we want to admit you, and then
everything just stopped,’’ Unger said. ‘‘On
the day Trump announced they were cutting
indirect costs . . . USC paused all Ph.D. admissions.’’
‘‘I just don’t know what to tell them,’’
Unger said of the students. ‘‘Some of them
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.095 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1987
have other offers and will likely go somewhere else. We’ve probably lost them.’’
Despite USC’s ‘‘unpausing’’ of admissions
in many departments, Unger said Wednesday
she was still not able to admit students. She
hoped her portal to admit students would
open soon, but said the disruption was coming at a time when her field, public health,
was already reeling from the actions of the
Trump administration, something affecting
potential graduate students as well.
‘‘It’s very stressful for them, this is a
major life decision,’’ she said, adding they
were already worried about their futures.
‘‘They were asking, ‘Do you think we’ll be
able to get a job in this environment? Do you
think we’ll get grants?’’’
The dean of the Graduate School at USC
told STAT late Friday that the university
briefly paused Ph.D. admissions to ‘‘assess
the uncertainties around federal funding,’’
but that the admissions process was now
open.
Some schools were continuing to accept
students or had accepted graduate students
before the recent turmoil and said those offers are intact.
‘‘We have no knowledge of any disruptions
to graduate student admissions in the
science fields . . . ,’’ Rachel Zaentz, senior
director of communications [said].
In some cases, the pauses to hiring and admissions were implemented ahead of the NIH
policy change—evidence of how quickly the
Trump administration’s threats to withhold
federal research dollars over diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts are shifting the financial footings of universities.
On Feb. 6, faculty at Vanderbilt University
were instructed to reduce graduate admissions by half across the board, according to
an email obtained by STAT.
Reduce graduate admissions by half.
On the same day, faculty at the University
of Washington School of Public Health received an email to pause offers to doctoral
students as well as offers of financial support
to graduate students. Faculty hiring was
also frozen, the email said. This Tuesday, the
public health school sent out another email
informing the community that some faculty
hiring and Ph.D. student offers would continue, but at a greatly diminished level.
The school is also planning to take more
‘‘cost containment measures,’’ including hiring freezes and reappointment freezes . . .
through the end of the academic year due to
the volatility caused by the Trump administration. Existing offers will be honored,
wrote Hilary Godwin, dean of UW’s school of
public health.
Marion Pepper, chair of UW’s immunology
department, said she was instructed by university leadership to keep her program’s
next graduate cohort smaller than the usual
five to nine students admitted each year.
That’s easier said than done, because the
proportion of students who accept offers of
admission varies year-to-year. Pepper told
STAT that while she expects the incoming
class to be slightly smaller than normal, she
has spoken with program heads at UW and
elsewhere who are reducing class sizes by
half or more.
‘‘I know for other programs, they’re feeling
very bleak about how they’re going to keep
labs running without funding or students,’’
Pepper said. ‘‘It’s pretty overwhelming.’’
Medical schools are hit hard. Medical
research is hit hard.
It’s unclear how many other universities
are taking similar preemptive belt-tightening measures, but schools of public health
and medical schools are particularly vulnerable, because they tend to have many faculty, postdocs, and graduate students supported by grants.
Boston University School of Public Health
has also ordered an across-the-board hiring
freeze on all new faculty and staff positions—including student workers and
postdocs. In a campus-wide announcement,
Dean ad interim Michael Stein said the move
was being made due to ‘‘the uncertainty of
the moment.’’ A spokesperson for the school
told STAT that graduate admissions are unaffected by the freeze.
Unger said USC had cut funding for some
[teaching assistants] in her department earlier this year before the new executive orders, which reduced the number of graduate
students her program could accept from 10 to
6.
On Feb. 11, Columbia University’s medical
school faculty were told that the school was
putting a temporary pause on hiring as well
as other activities like travel and procuring
equipment, according to an email obtained
by the Columbia student newspaper, the Columbia Spectator. A spokesperson for Columbia declined to comment on the pause.
In other cases, schools may accept fewer
graduate students than they had planned,
not because of an overt directive from university leaders, but because faculty feel unsure about future funding, given the Trump
administration’s intent to cut billions of dollars in overhead funding.
At the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 25% fewer graduate students will be
admitted this year—
Twenty-five percent fewer—
based on a survey of faculty members taking
new students, said Mark Peifer, a professor
of cell biology there. This means the school
will admit about 75 students across the biomedical sciences. He noted the numbers of
graduate students vary each year so the decline was not unprecedented.
And the numbers continue to go
down.
In an interview with STAT, Robert Ferris,
the director of UNC’s Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, said that hiring freezes,
fewer Ph.D. student offers, and other similar
cost containment measures are being considered as the center is eyeing the same financially turbulent waters as other research institutions. ‘‘Every one of those things is on
the table, unfortunately,’’ Ferris said.
‘‘There’s so much uncertainty. Can we hire
this faculty member? Can we purchase this
equipment?’’
They just don’t know exactly what or how
many measures the center may have to take,
he said, as there are simply still too many
unknowns—for instance, the outcome of the
NIH indirect rate cut policy is still up in the
air. ‘‘Not knowing how it’s going to shake
out,’’ he said, ‘‘it just freezes everybody into
inaction.’’
Adding to the uncertainty is disruptions to
key parts of the NIH approval process for
proposed research grants. Although some
meetings of study sections—in which grant
applications are reviewed—resumed at the
start of the month, meetings of advisory
councils have not. Each of the 27 institutes
of the NIH has its own advisory council,
which meets three times a year to issue final
funding recommendations on new research
projects. None of these councils—
None—
has met since the Jan. 22 communications
freeze was ordered across all federal health
agencies.
A law called the Federal Advisory Committee Act requires that advisory councils
post meeting details in the Federal Register
15 days prior to their scheduled date. But because submissions to the Federal Register
have been put on hold indefinitely, these
meetings can’t take place. And without
these meetings, no new grants can be funded.
According to one NIH employee, at least
one NIH meeting scheduled for this Friday to
allow an institute director to provide updates that could proceed because it had been
posted to the Federal Register was nonetheless canceled Wednesday. This was because
the meeting specified it would include a session open to the public—but because a ban
remains in place on any public communications, meetings with open sessions cannot be
held. ‘‘And they can’t update the federal registry with a revised agenda stating no open
session because the federal registry is
closed.’’
Principal investigators who had been
counting on awards to pay the salaries of
new graduate students and postdocs are now
left wondering if their labs will be able to
make it through the summer, let alone take
on new members.
Referencing the hold on submissions to the
Federal Register, MIT neuroscientist Nancy
Kanwisher posted on social media Wednesday: ‘‘So much for the grant I submitted last
September, which was supposed to be reviewed next week. Hardly the biggest tragedy on the current scale of things, but it will
force me to severely downsize my already
small lab.’’
Fears were similar for one computational
genomics researcher at a prominent East
Coast institution who asked for anonymity
for fear of being targeted by the new administration. ‘‘We have people coming to visit
the lab next week, and these are students we
haven’t made offers to yet because we
can’t,’’ he said. ‘‘I don’t know what I’m going
to tell them.’’
Beyond the immediate harm to young scientists, he worries about the long-term damage to fields like computer science and biomedical engineering—areas where the U.S.
has long been the world leader. ‘‘If we stop
training students, we’re going to lose that
lead very quickly,’’ he said. ‘‘It’s not clear
anyone else is going to pick up the ball.
We’re just going to be worse off and people
won’t even be aware of it—it’s hard to notice
when it takes 20 years instead of 10 to get a
cure.’’
Cuts within NIH are also adding to the rapidly constricting pool of places prospective
scientists can go to train. Since the 1960s,
the NIH has provided opportunities for recent college graduates to spend one or two
years in a full-time research position within
one of the institute’s labs, which many scientists see as a key tool for recruiting young
people into biomedical fields. On Feb. 1, a
notice appeared on the NIH website announcing that all training programs had paused recruitment ‘‘pending guidance from Health
and Human Services.’’
The NIH’s Postbac Program, which provides recent college graduates with research
positions and career advising and last year
admitted roughly 1,600 people, will not be accepting any new applicants for 2025, according to an NIH employee who asked for anonymity for fear of repercussions.
Of course, that is my add.
‘‘It’s a vital link in the training of doctors
and biomedical scientists in the country,’’
the NIH employee said. ‘‘You can’t find a
medical school or biomed program that
doesn’t have students from the postbac program.’’
And it is ending.
While the Trump administration may be
hoping that the headwinds it’s creating for
academic hiring may push recent graduates
or newly minted Ph.D.s into private industry, it’s unlikely to play out that way because of the speed and scale of the disruption. ‘‘Pharmaceutical firms are not going to
suddenly open up more jobs for graduates to
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.096 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1988 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
adapt to this situation,’’ said Ding. More
likely is that people will start looking for
opportunities outside the U.S., or wind up
without jobs altogether, she added.
At this point, it’s still too early to say if
these are the first signs of losing a generation of American scientists. But even people
like Ding, who track the data that could provide clues about how extensive the damage
will be, are facing uncertainty about their
ability to continue their own work.
Her plans to hire a postdoc are currently
on hold as she waits to find out if a grant she
has through the National Science Foundation—which is facing its own drastic cuts—
will come through.
(Mr. HUSTED assumed the Chair.)
I mean, honestly. I am here because I
said at the beginning, some 9 hours
ago, that I was going to stand here because what is going on in America is
not normal. We have gone through
healthcare cuts. We have gone through
Social Security being attacked and undermined and slashed, and the Department of Education. But if those things
don’t worry you, statements like this
should:
It is still a little too early to say that
these things are the first signs of losing a
generation of American scientists.
I know this. I have been privileged. I
studied at Oxford University overseas.
I have studied at Stanford University
in Silicon Valley, and I have studied at
Yale.
I watched friends get degrees in the
sciences and things I couldn’t spell,
and they had options, not just in America. But for the brightest minds on the
planet Earth, there is a global competition going on for them from Canada to
Oxford, to countries in Asia.
If you are telling me that thousands
of people, right now, 71 days into the
Trump administration, are losing opportunities in the sciences to do research in the most important areas of
human endeavor can’t get hired, they
will go elsewhere.
For over a generation, America has
led the planet Earth because of this
combination between research universities, private sector industry, and government. How do I know this? Because
I am here because of it. The whole computer revolution in America was because incredible computer science researchers at academic institutions
were partnering with industry and
being funded in many ways by the government, and it helped companies like
IBM with their mainframes dominate.
My dad was one of IBM’s first Black
people hired as a salesman in the Washington, DC-Maryland area. My parents
were IBMers because when scientific
endeavor explodes into new industry,
new ideas, new biomedical breakthroughs, it creates a ripple effect in
our economy lifting so many people up.
And in 71 days, Donald Trump’s actions have led scientific articles like
this to talk about a postbac program
that provides bright recent college
graduates—brilliant people, 1,600 of
them—to usually get jobs to be canceled.
And this article laments from scientists—not political people, not politicians—that this is a crisis. It is a crisis in America, and we haven’t held one
hearing on this in Congress.
Yet university after university—I
can’t be the only Senator having this
happen—not just from my State. The
universities are coming from New York
to California, sounding the alarm that
we are going to lose our competitive
edge against one of our greatest competitors, China, which is doubling
down, as the article said, in research
on the sciences.
But let me just give you some examples, and then I will yield for a question. I want to talk about some New
Jersey institutions that have written
me:
Rutgers has been a partner in the Air
Force Research Laboratory Minority Leaders Research Collaborative Program, a grant
which has been led by the Ohio State University and is on pause.
God forbid they use the word ‘‘minority.’’
And the annual program review and summer internship programs are not expected to
happen this year.
Rutgers School of Nursing has been working with the Institute of Human Virology in
Nigeria on an action to sustain precision in
HIV response toward epidemic control, and
they were funded through a CDC and
PEPFAR grant. A stop work order came in.
Multiple Rutgers entities have received
communications from Federal Agencies related to DEIA cancellation of apprenticeship
programs.
Many conferences have been canceled
that are trying to find the best minds
wherever they might be because there
is many geniuses at Howard and Fisk
and Morehouse that are often overlooked.
Annika Barber, a faculty at the Rutgers department of molecular biology
and biochemistry writes me this:
Rutgers holds an NIH initiative for maximizing student development training grant
that supports an additional five doctoral students. This grant expires in January 2026,
and we put in for renewal this fall, for which
I wrote a letter of support. However, it seems
likely that this grant proposal will not even
be reviewed.
I just completed the first year of funding
on my NIH Maximizing Investigators’ Research Award and put in my progress report
for the next years of funding. These are noncompeting renewals, which means they don’t
go through peer review. In the past, they
were reviewed by the NIH program officials
to ensure the funds were being managed in
accordance with the approval grant and the
research funds.
However, NIH has been extremely slow to
process even these noncompetitive renewals.
This type of grant requires a plan for enhancing the work.
I want to read this last letter. It is
handwritten:
I am writing you not only as a concerned
parent that believes in progress, education,
and the power of science to improve lives.
My daughter is a Ph.D. in neuroscience,
dedicating her life to research that has the
potential to save countless lives. As a minority in science, she has worked tirelessly to
overcome barriers in a field that is already
competitive and abandoned.
Watching the current political attacks on
research funding is devastating not just her
future but the future of the American country. Science is not political. It serves all people.
Yet funding cuts to Agencies like NIH and
the National Science Foundation threaten to
halt critical research that leads to medical
breakthroughs. These cuts will not only slow
progress in fighting diseases like cancer, Alzheimer’s, and Parkinson’s, but they will also
discourage young, diverse scientists, many of
whom have already fought hard to be in
these spaces, from staying in the field. This
is not just about scientists. It is about every
American.
Diseases do not know political parties.
Without adequate research funding, we are
all at risk of losing the chance for better
treatments, new cures, and improved
healthcare. If we truly want a stronger and
more innovative America, we must invest in
science, not abandon it.
Defunding research will also harm our
economy. Scientific innovation drives job
creation, medical advancements, and global
progress. A country that does not invest in
science is a country that falls behind.
Mr. MURPHY. Does the Senator
yield?
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield for a question while retaining the floor.
Mr. MURPHY. I thank the Senator.
What the Senator is outlining is an
extraordinary assault not just on education but on the knowledge economy.
I want to bring manufacturing jobs
back to this country, but I understand—I think everybody understands—that we are not going to be a
nation filled with low-skilled manufacturing jobs. We are going to be a nation
that does high-skilled manufacturing.
We are going to be a nation that invents things. We are going to be a nation that is dependent on engineering
and on invention. We are going to be a
knowledge economy.
We are today, but we are going to be
even more reliant on maintaining and
expanding our knowledge edge on the
rest of the world, given the fact that
the pace of change and the oncoming
transformation that will come from robotics and AI will make it even more
important for a nation to have the
most highly skilled, most highly educated workforce possible in order to
stay ahead of the curve and not have
employment be buried by automation
and artificial intelligence.
So this is a moment in which we
should be doubling down on our support for the knowledge economy, on an
integration of public sector research
and private sector research, which has
always been the genius of American
economy. We did that integration better than anybody, and it is not coincidental that we leap-frogged the rest of
the world when it came to that innovation economy.
But what the Senator is explaining is
that the Trump administration is waging a war on the knowledge economy.
It is literally signing our economic
death warrant by coming after the
foundational strength of our Nation,
which is that public-private sector integration.
I just checked in with the University
of Connecticut, which is going to lose
$165 million because of this illegal
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.098 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1989
change that the Trump administration
has implemented, dramatically cutting
the amount of research dollars that go
to institutions with NIH grants.
I will just read half their list. They
gave me a list of all their research
projects that are going to either be
eliminated or slowed for diminished:
A project for improving physical and cognitive function in aging; a project for improving outcomes for people with autism; a
project for understanding neural mechanisms for language and reading, including
people with dyslexia; funding for prevention
and care for HIV patients; projects for studying the leading causes of death and disability
in the United States, including cancer, obesity, Alzheimer’s disease, and substance
abuse; projects studying treatments for rare
diseases and genetic disorders with specific
impacts on health, including sickle cell,
mitochondrial disorders, Rett syndrome,
Prader-Willi syndrome, muscle and bone regeneration research, tick-borne diseases.
The University of Connecticut faces
the same crisis as all the other institutions listed in that incredibly long
STAT news article.
And as you mentioned, research is
not going to wait around for this crisis
to pass. They are going to accept offers
from research institutions in other
countries, from our European allies to
our Asian competitors. We are going to
lose our competitive edge when it
comes to research.
It is worth noting that this change in
research funding is illegal. Article I
vests the spending power of the Federal
Government in Congress. That is plain
and simple, and there are lots of good
reasons why our Founding Fathers did
that, Senator BOOKER. They were determined to keep the spending power
out of the hands of the executive
branch because they had seen how the
British King used the Treasury in order
to compel loyalty and to punish opposition: You get money if you are loyal to
me.
You get money if you are loyal to
me; I withhold money from you if you
are disloyal to me.
And so Congress got the spending
power. We decided the exact rate of reimbursement for medical research. We
were very specific about it in the statute that we passed, Republicans and
Democrats.
This cut in funding for institutes of
higher educations’ research that has
been implemented by the administration is illegal on its face.
Congress said exactly how research
funding should be allocated; the President is ignoring that statute and implementing a unilateral cut.
It has been enjoined by the Federal
court. Hopefully, if the courts follow
the law, it will be permanently
stopped.
But it is important to note that it
stands in a larger context of the Federal Government using its spending
power—excuse me—the Trump administration trying to seize control of Federal spending in order to do that work
that our Founding Fathers were so
worried about.
We have seen over the past several
weeks the administration march
through school after school, trying to
cut individual deals with institutions
of higher education. We will release
your funding only after you sign a bilateral agreement with the administration lining your institute of higher
education’s priorities up with the political interests of the administration.
This is exactly what our Founding
Fathers were trying to avoid: the Executive using the spending power to compel loyalty from individuals and institutions. What they are doing is illegal.
And it is beyond me why my Republican colleagues, our Republican colleagues, stand idly by while the spending power vested in Congress by the
Constitution is ripped from us.
But, Senator BOOKER, I guess I am
going to ask you the same question I
did when it came to this assault on Social Security, and it is a simple question. And I will lay out a little bit of a
predicate. The question is: Why?
What the administration has done is
extraordinary, proposing to close the
Department of Education—wildly unpopular. Nobody is asking for that—
waging this illegal and unconstitutional assault on our knowledge economy, suspending funding for institutions of higher education, research
budgets, when, plainly, the statute
says they cannot do that. So why engage in this extraordinary action to essentially destroy America’s knowledge
economy from elementary school all
the way up to graduate education?
Well, as we have talked about, as you
laid out, it can’t be because you are
trying to help the economy. This destroys the economy. I mean, this is the
worst thing that you could probably do
for the economy is to wage this open,
transparent, proudful assault on research because we will not survive as
an economy unless we are the place
where cutting-edge research and invention happens. We just won’t.
And so researchers now, who are having all of their offers suspended by
major colleges and universities, they
are looking elsewhere. Maybe they are
hoping that the offer still comes
through, but they are dialing up other
competitors, many of them outside of
the United States.
There was a story out of the University of Cambridge in England a couple
weeks ago in which their administrators were talking about the bounty
that they are receiving as some of the
highest class researchers in the world
are coming to them because they don’t
believe that they will have any source
of stable funding from the United
States.
Mr. BOOKER. Wow.
Mr. MURPHY. So it can’t be about
helping us create jobs or supporting
our economy. This is, no doubt, an assault on the economy.
One of the complaints that I hear
often about elementary and secondary
education is that the Department of
Education was engaged in micromanagement, right? That it was a Federal school board, and we want to get
the Federal Government out of the
business of dictating what local schools
will do.
Well, that is not a credible explanation for what is happening because,
in fact, the Trump administration is
telegraphing that they are going to actually jump into the micromanagement of our local schools.
Nobody has any idea what ‘‘DEI’’
means. Let’s just be honest. It means
something different to every single official in the Trump administration. It
is just a proxy to impose a set of reactionary, rightwing values on our
schools or on our Federal Agencies.
I asked a question of the nominee to
be the alleged last Secretary of Education as to whether or not AfricanAmerican history could be taught in
our high schools any longer, and her
answer was essentially maybe not. I
don’t know, but DEI might mean that
you can’t teach African-American history. It might mean that the Federal
Government is going to comb through
every syllabus in every high school in
the entire country and tell you what
courses you can teach and what
courses you can’t. And if there are any
words in there that our AI algorithm
doesn’t like—like ‘‘African’’—can’t
teach it. That is a level of micromanagement never seen before in the
Federal Government.
And so the reason that they are
cracking down on the Department of
Education or eliminating funding for
research is not because they are trying
to get the Federal Government out of
the management of our schools, because they are doing exactly the opposite. They are telling you that your
school is not going to be able to make
decisions on what classes it offers its
students. It is going to be Linda McMahon, the former CEO of the World
Wrestling Federation, that is going to
be in charge of whether your school
can teach African-American history.
OK?
So then what is the reason, Senator
BOOKER? And I will, you know, just
give you a couple suggestions: Well,
maybe it is just to compel loyalty,
right? Maybe it is just to use that
money to compel loyalty so that
boards of education or colleges are only
teaching conservative or right-leaning
curriculum.
Maybe it is to try to quell protests
on campuses so that there isn’t an ability for students to robustly protest the
policies of the regime.
Maybe it is just to destroy the idea of
objective truth. I mean, this whole
scandal over Signal has lots of elements to it, but I think one of the most
worrying things for the American public, why it is still a story a week later,
is because the Secretary of Defense
looked the American public in the eye
and said: 2 plus 2 equals 9. Right? He
said: Those Signal texts you saw did
not involve war plans, did not involve
classified information.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.099 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1990 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
The American public was like: Wait a
second. We read them. I am not dumb.
I know those were war plans. I know
that that was classified information.
But if you are in the business of trying to unwind democracy, you have to
destroy objective truth. You have to
make everything political. You have to
make everything subjective.
Where is objective truth midwifed? It
is in our education system. That is
where we learn 2 plus 2 equals 4 every
time. But if you want to undermine the
foundation of a democracy, then you
undermine the place where truth happens.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes.
Mr. MURPHY. OK. Maybe it is the
same agenda with Social Security, just
come up with an excuse to privatize it
all. Just take all the money that is
going to good, public sector research
and just move it all into the private
sector so it can be a source to reward
the friends of President Trump. That
could be a rationale as well.
Or maybe it is even simpler. Maybe it
is just to own the libs. Maybe it is just
that, historically, Democrats on the
left have maybe talked about education more than Republicans have,
even though, to me, it was always
something we both cared about. Whether or not I agree with George Bush’s
‘‘No Child Left Behind’’ plan, at least
he was walking into the Capitol with a
plan to try to improve education.
But maybe it is just that Democrats
on the left have historically talked
more about education. And if you believe, as Donald Trump does, that all
politics is zero sum, anything the
Democrats are for must be, by definition, bad for America. And Democrats
seem to like college, and they seem to
really support our schools, so we have
to destroy our colleges, and we have to
destroy public education. Because if
the left is for it, it must be evil. Maybe
that is the reason they are doing it.
But that is the question I pose to you
because it has nothing to do with our
economy. It has nothing to do with
getting the Federal Government out of
the management of schools and colleges. There is another agenda here,
and it doesn’t seem to be an agenda
that squares with anything that the
American people have been asking,
Senator BOOKER.
Mr. BOOKER. I just want to answer
you. Again, I would drive myself mad
trying to understand what the ambitions of Trump were or the ambitions
behind some of the crazy stuff in
Project 2025 that he said wasn’t there,
and he tried to run away from it because it was so unpopular, and now so
much of it is being done. It almost
sounds too partisan, too insane.
What I do want to do, Senator MURPHY, in answer to your question—all I
can do is try to be as fair and factual
in describing what is happening in our
country and appeal to people who are
moderates in this country, the people
who are fair arbiters of what is happening, to try to appeal to them that
this is a crisis.
So when university after university
after university is cutting scientific research, stopping bringing in the best
minds, Ph.D. candidates, post-docs,
when they are telling you that they are
stopping investment in state-of-the-art
research buildings, when they are telling you that they are shutting down
programs to bring the youngest,
brightest minds in and our competitor
China is doing the exact opposite, flowing money through because China understands if we get two steps ahead of
America on quantum computing, we
can break all kinds of encryptions. We
can locate every submarine they have.
China understands if we can get two
steps ahead of America on artificial intelligence, it is an endgame for them.
This is a global competition, and a
President, in 71 days—if you are a moderate in America and just want America to win in human endeavor, look at
what the President is doing. And here
is to the point you were driving, Senator MURPHY. It is Orwellian.
The bastions of freedom that are our
universities, as an article from Fareed
Zakaria has said, even if universities
got too woke and too excessive, the
antidote to that isn’t to try to shut
down the thought of the left. It is to
try to make a fair, more competitive
marketplace for ideas from all around
the political spectrum.
But this isn’t about politics; it is
about science; it is about research; it is
about cutting NIH funding, science
funding. But I want to stick with that
because that is the controversial nub,
right?
Like, we need to go after DEI programs. I am hearing it all the time. It
was like the confusion I had 5 years
ago when people were asking me: Oh,
the Republicans are talking about critical race theory. As my father says, I
have more degrees than the month of
July, but I am not hot. But I had to go
back and research: What is critical
race theory? Oxford, Stanford, Yale
grad, I wasn’t sure what they were
talking about. And this is the rub on
that because I don’t want to just talk
about what is obvious, which should
enrage people on both sides of the aisle,
not just enrage people on both sides of
the aisle because of the China
outcompeting us, but because we allocated this money in a bipartisan way
that he is now trying to pull back.
That should raise a violation of article
I of the Constitution.
But I want to stick in this more controversial era that you talked about
that has, all across the country, people
banning books. When I heard Toni Morrison’s ‘‘The Bluest Eye’’ was being
taken out of libraries, when I heard my
favorite author James Baldwin was
being taken out of libraries—what kind
of world do we live in where, somehow,
studying what they call Black history
is something that we have to—that
Trump feels like it is a rally for people
to stop, where a person working for the
Department of Education can’t look
you in the eye and say: Yes, we need to
study Black history? Black history is
American history.
I had a brilliant friend of mine, brilliant. He looked at me with deadpan
embarrassment and told me he just
found out that year about the bombing
in Tulsa, OK, something I worked with
Senator LANKFORD to do more to memorialize, but he just never knew
about it; that this thriving AfricanAmerican financial community was the
first recorded aerial bombing—not
Pearl Harbor—in the United States of
America, and he was never taught it.
Is that Black history or is that
American history?
Why do these people who attack our
history think they have to sanitize, homogenize, ‘‘Disneyfy’’ American history to make us proud? I am more
proud of our country when we tell the
truth about what happened, when we
learned from the wretchedness and the
difficulties and the bigotries and the
hates and demagogues who pit us
against each other and how we all overcame that. That is our greatness. How
the genius of inventors that were
women or Blacks in the most oppressive of times still manifested their genius that transformed humanities.
These are stories that should make
every American more proud.
So, yes, when you have a President
now that is making people scrape
through programs that they don’t even
know what they are doing, but if there
were more diversity in it, that is bad?
That is insanity.
My mom worked for IBM before they
used words like ‘‘DEI.’’ One of her jobs
was to find a bigger pool of highly
qualified applicants. You know what
she did is what is being stopped by the
Trump administration. She just made
sure that they were going to HCBUs to
find the brightest students so that
their applicant pool would be better.
This isn’t about preferential treatment
for one group over another; it is about
trying to create a more competitive
pool where we get the best of the best.
It is about merit-based.
And this President talked about
merit—and I watched Senator WHITEHOUSE ask one of the top lawyers of the
EPA if he ever brought a case, if he
ever had a hearing, if he ever did a deposition—no, no, no. Wait a minute.
How are you qualified for this job?
And that is the conflict in the logic
that I am observing. In one sense, they
are exalting the wealthy elites. I have
never imagined that I would see a Presidential inauguration where the billionaires, leaders of tech companies,
would sit in front of Cabinet members,
many of whom were billionaires themselves—but that kind of elitism. Yet
they call academic excellence, brilliance, and achievement in the sciences
at these universities the elites we need
to go after.
If we start going after our educational institutions and weakening
their ability to advance excellence in
human endeavor, we are injuring ourselves, and we have models for that. As
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.101 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1991
Fareed Zakaria says, the best example
was Mao Zedong and the cultural revolution where one of the first groups
they went after were their universities.
Now they are reversing that. They
watched what we did so well. They are
doubling down on their funding of universities. They are taking their best
scientists and taking away their passports because they don’t want them to
come here and study. They are trying
to get ahead of us in DeepSeek and AI.
They are trying to get ahead of us in
quantum computers. They are trying
to get ahead of us in robotics. They are
trying to get ahead of us in biomedical
engineering. They are trying to get
ahead of us in all of these things. They
know the way they do it is do what
America did in the sixties, seventies,
eighties, the nineties, the aughts,
2010—to do what they did all those
times and look at them now.
Mr. MURPHY. Will the Senator
yield?
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield while still
retaining the floor.
Mr. MURPHY. I take the Senator’s
point, my friend’s point. I am probing
tonight for the why because it is the
obvious question. It doesn’t make
sense, right? On its face, this intentional chaos—this intentional chaos in
Social Security, in Medicare, in higher
education, it doesn’t make sense. It is
not about efficiency. It is not about
jobs. So what is it about?
But your point is a good one. That
may not actually be the conversation
that a lot of apolitical Americans are
asking. They may just be looking at
this on the face and say: How does this
impact me? It doesn’t matter to me
why it is happening; it matters how it
is going to impact me.
There is no doubt that this assault on
higher education has none; it does. We
are, as you said it better than I have,
we are just in a race.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes.
Mr. MURPHY. We are just in a race,
and we just decided to slow down to a
walk, which is a shame because we are
fast. We are fast. This country is quick.
And our coach just told us, start walking while the other guys speed up.
This is why we have urgency because
the race—this one is not. Maybe it is a
marathon. But it is one of those races
where if the other team gets too big a
lead, it is going to be hard to catch up.
So in the next 31⁄2 years, if we just
stand down in terms of supporting the
knowledge economy, we are going to
shed millions of jobs—millions of jobs.
And once those centers of excellence,
research excellence are outside the
United States, it is not like the next
President can just come back in and fix
it. That becomes a permanent liability
for us.
The reason that I am here on the
floor with you, Senator BOOKER, is because I agree with you that this is not
normal. But I also agree with you that
we have to wake our colleagues up fast
because like a second ago, I thought we
all agreed on the fact that we need to
support the knowledge economy. Like 2
seconds ago, we were all raising hands
together, Republicans and Democrats,
that we finally started putting big new
dollars into NIH. We did a $2 billion increase, I think, a few years ago, and it
was a big bipartisan achievement. And
all of a sudden, just because Donald
Trump is in the White House, we have
lost the bipartisan consensus of the
knowledge economy.
Mr. BOOKER. I want to interrupt you
before you go to your last question. I
know you want to get your last question out before I get to the next area so
related to this, immigration. I mean,
the brightest minds on the planet
Earth are coming here.
Mr. MURPHY. I am good. I made my
point.
Mr. BOOKER. I want to say something to you. You got me triggered
when you said we had some consensus
over the last 4 years. I love how you
say just yesterday. I remember the
CHIPS and Science Act. That was a bipartisan bill. I was sitting in a SCIF
with all of us, and I watched a whole
national security apparatus talk about
why science endeavors and chipmaking
and the breakthroughs that are happening on chips are so essential for our
national security and how we had to
stay ahead of the competition. And we
marched out of that meeting in a bipartisan fashion. We saw this in the bipartisan work we have been doing on
AI here, talking about how America
has to lead in this area.
And with all of that bipartisan vigor,
we let a President come in and in 71
days, halt scientific research, pausing
literally experiments in their tracks,
halting researchers in their tracks,
shaking universities to the core that
are afraid of free expression for getting
on the wrong side of ‘‘Dear Leader’’
that it might cost them their science
funding. So you are putting your finger
on it.
But can I just say something on a
personal level because I just want to
remind folks, as we are closing in on
the 10th hour, that you and I were here
for 15, and you are here because you
agree with me. You agree with me that
from science and research to higher
education, Department of Education,
Social Security, to healthcare in
America, we are at a crisis. Any one of
those alone should have Americans—
but the case we are making going
through all these, we are pulling from
people on the left and the right. We
quoted Republican Governors. We have
quoted Republican mayor organizations, represented by organizations. We
quoted Republican business people. We
quoted the Wall Street Journal. This is
not a partisan crisis that people across
the spectrum are pointing to.
But I do want to point out, you have
been such a good friend to me to spend
10 hours, almost, on the floor, and it
means a lot to me tonight. Thank you
for that.
As I switch to immigration, I appreciate the sentiments that you have and
that you had after the Pulse shooting
that you were so worried about when I
listened to your maiden speech when
you first got here in the Senate that
we would normalize gun violence in
this country. What I am worried
about—I share your worry there. I grew
up in a time where fire drills were the
big thing. And the space between people ducking and covering because of
nuclear fears and left school before we
were a country that had more active
shooter drills than fire drills, and we
just sort of are normalizing this terror
in our country and haven’t stepped up
to the challenge of really doing something about it.
This is one of these crises where if we
act like business as usual, 71 days so
far of the Trump administration, when
we get to 100 days, catastrophic things
could have happened to Medicaid and
healthcare, crashing of research for
science, attacks on programs our senior citizens rely on. We, as a country
have to, as I said at the very beginning
10 hours ago almost—we have to do
what John Lewis challenged us to do:
To stand up, to speak up, to get in good
trouble, necessary trouble.
And tonight, my friend, in the wee
hours—there are so many songs about 4
o’clock in the morning. It is like the
hour nobody should be awake. I want
to thank the Presiding Officer for being
here. I want to thank the clerks and
parliamentary staff and the impositions. But the cries of American citizens for their leaders to do something
different, to stand up, to speak up—I
felt like this has to be done. Let’s keep
going. Almost 10 hours in, I am thankful.
We are going to start the next session. Like I am trying to do in all of
these, I am trying to elevate the voices
that don’t get to come to this place—
voices I am hearing from, voices that
identify themselves as a Republican
veteran, a Democrat. Most of them are
just people saying this is not normal.
Many of them are saying, ‘‘Do something.’’ Some of them get me very emotional saying, ‘‘What can I do?’’ I get
that question a lot: ‘‘Tell me what I
can do to try to stop this.’’
We are going to take this issue of immigration. And here is—I am not sure
where this person is from. My staff has
covered it up, probably to protect the
person’s identity. I am going to read
this handwritten note. It is from New
Jersey.
Thank you, Senator Booker. Please continue to fight the good fight against the injustices being done by the current administration. I am the pastor of Emanuel Lutheran Church in New Brunswick. As a faith
leader and your constituent, I am deeply
concerned about the treatment of LGBTQ
people and immigrants by this administration. The demonization and marginalization
of these groups is unchristian and deeply offensive to the values of my faith. I ask that
you continue to oppose all Executive orders
and legislation that targets these groups.
You have been a consistent ally. Please continue to be a champion for justice for all people, but especially the most vulnerable.
Another person, late yesterday, in
fact:
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.102 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1992 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Court filings of the Trump administration
reveal that a mistakenly deported Maryland
father with protected legal status to this
horrific prison in El Salvador—Abrego Garcia is married to a U.S. citizen and has a 5-
year-old disabled child who is a U.S. citizen.
He has no criminal record in the United
States. Despite receiving a legal status call
withholding of removal where a United
States immigration judge found that he
would more likely than not face persecution
if deported to El Salvador, the Trump administration deported him, where? The very
country from which he fled gang violence.
Here is a story that was written
about him in The Atlantic.
The Trump administration acknowledged
in a court filing on Monday that it had
grabbed a Maryland father with protected
legal status and mistakenly deported him to
El Salvador. It was said that U.S. courts
lack jurisdiction to order his return from the
mega prison where he’s now locked up.
The case appears to be the first time the
Trump administration has admitted to errors when it sent three planeloads of Salvadorian and Venezuelan deportees to El Salvador’s . . . ‘‘Terrorism Confinement Center’’ on March 15. Attorneys for several Venezuelan deportees have said that the Trump
administration falsely labeled their clients
as gang members because of their tattoos
. . . But in Monday’s court filing, attorneys
for the government admitted that the Salvadorian man, Kilmar Abrego Garcia, was deported accidentally. ‘‘Although ICE was
aware of his protection from removal to El
Salvador, Abrego Garcia was removed to El
Salvador because of an administrative
error,’’ the government told the court.
Trump lawyers said the court has no ability
to bring him back now that Abrego Garcia is
in Salvadorian custody.
Simon Sandoval-Moshenberg, Abrego Garcia’s attorney, says he’s never seen a case in
which the government knowingly deported
someone who had already received protected
legal status from an immigration judge. He
is asking the court to order the Trump administration to ask for Abrego Garcia’s return and, if necessary, to withhold payment
to the Salvadorian government, which says
it’s charging the United States $6 million a
year to jail U.S. deportees.
[The] Trump administration . . . told the
court to dismiss the request on multiple
grounds, including . . . Trump’s primacy in
foreign affairs.
‘‘[P]rimacy in foreign affairs.’’ I am
not going to stop now, but I ask anybody who has read the Constitution to
understand that the President of the
United States is not King. He does not
have primacy in foreign affairs.
I continue with the article:
‘‘The claim that the court is powerless to
order any relief,’’ Sandoval-Moshenberg told
me, ‘‘if that’s true, the immigration laws are
meaningless—all of them—because the government can deport whoever they want,
wherever they want, whenever they want,
and no court can do anything about it once
it’s done.’’
Court filings show Abrego Garcia came to
the United States at the age of 16 in 2011
after fleeing gang threats in his native El
Salvador. In 2019, he received a form of protected legal status known as ‘‘withholding of
removal’’ from a U.S. immigration judge who
found he would likely be targeted by gangs if
he was deported back.
Abrego Garcia, who is married to a U.S.
citizen and has a 5-year-old disabled child
who is also a U.S. citizen, has no criminal
record in the United States, according to his
attorney. The Trump administration does
not claim he has a criminal record, but
called him a ‘‘danger to the community’’ and
an active member of MS–13, the Salvadorian
gang that Trump has declared a Foreign Terrorist Organization.
Sandoval-Moshenberg said those charges
are false, and the gang label stems from a
2019 incident where Abrego Garcia and three
other men were detained in a Home Depot
parking lot by a police detective in Prince
Georges County, Maryland. During questioning, one of the men told officers Abrego
was a gang member, but the man offered no
proof and police said they didn’t believe him,
filings show. Police did not identify him as a
gang member.
Abrego Garcia was not charged with a
crime, but he was handed over to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement after the
arrest to face deportation. In those proceedings, the government claimed that a reliable informant had identified him as a
ranking member of MS–13. Abrego Garcia
and his family hired an attorney and fought
the government’s attempt to deport him. He
received ‘‘withholding of removal’’ six
months later, a protected status.
It is not a path to permanent U.S. residency, but it means the government won’t
deport him back to his home country because he’s more likely than not to face harm
there.
Abrego Garcia has had no contact with any
law enforcement agency since his release, according to his attorney. He works full time
as a union sheet metal apprentice, has complied with requirements to check in annually
with ICE, and cares for his five-year-old son,
who has autism and a hearing defect, and is
unable to communicate verbally.
On March 12, Abrego Garcia had picked up
his son after work from the boy’s grandmother’s house when ICE officers stopped
the car, saying his protected status had
changed. Officers waited for Abrego’s wife to
come to the scene and take care of the boy,
then drove him away in handcuffs. Within
two days, he had been transferred to an ICE
staging facility in Texas, along with other
detainees the government was preparing to
send to El Salvador. Trump had invoked the
Alien Enemies Act of 1798, and the government planned to deport two planeloads of
Venezuelans along with a separate group of
Salvadorians.
Abrego’s family has had no contact with
him since he was sent to the megaprison in
El Salvador, known as the CECOT.
C-E-C-O-T.
His wife spotted her husband in news photographs released by Salvadorian President
. . . Bukele on the morning of March 16,
after a U.S. District Judge had told the
Trump administration to halt the flights.
‘‘Oopsie,’’ Bukele wrote on social media,
taunting the judge.
Abrego Garcia’s wife recognized her husband’s decorative arm tattoo and scars, according to the court filing. The image
showed Salvadoran guards in black ski
masks frog-marching him into the prison,
with his head down—
Shoved down—
toward the floor. The CECOT is the same
prison Department of Homeland Security
Secretary Kristi Noem visited last week, recording videos for social media while standing in front of a cell packed with silent detainees.
If the government wants to deport someone with protective status, the standard
course would be to reopen the case and introduce new evidence arguing for deportation.
The deportation of a protected status holder
has even stunned some government attorneys I’ve been in touch with who are tracking the case, who declined to be named because they weren’t authorized to speak to
the press. [One of those people texted me:
‘‘What’’ period ‘‘the’’ period ‘‘explicative’’
period.]
Sandoval-Moshenberg told the court he believes Trump officials deported his client
through extrajudicial means because they
believed that going through the immigration
judge process took too long and feared that
they might not win all of their cases.
Officials at ICE and the Department of
Homeland Security did not respond to a request for comment. The Monday court filing
by the government indicates officials knew
Abrego Garcia had legal protections shielding him from deportation to El Salvador.
‘‘ICE was aware of this grant of withholding the removal at the time [of] Abrego
Garcia’s removal from the United States.
Reference was made . . . on internal
forms’’. . . . Abrego Garcia was not on the
initial manifest of the deportation flight,
but was listed as ‘‘an alternate,’’ the government attorneys explained. As other detainees were removed from the flight for various
reasons, Abrego Garcia ‘‘moved up the list.’’
The flight manifest ‘‘did not indicate that
Abrego Garcia should not be removed,’’ the
attorneys said. ‘‘Through administrative
error, Abrego Garcia was removed from the
United States to El Salvador. This was an
oversight,’’ [the government admitted.] But
despite this, they told the court that Abrego
Garcia’s deportation was carried out ‘‘in
good faith.’’
I am going to go into a section now,
and I am going to read things by conservative Justices and liberal Justices
to some of the most conservative Supreme Court Justices who say that this
is outrageous in this Nation.
There are parts of this Constitution
that I am going to talk about that talk
about due process, that talk about fundamental American ideals. But this is
a story and a few others I have heard
where Americans who have the status
to stay here, who have an American
spouse and American children who will
be traumatized by this—in this case, a
disabled child whose working father is
struggling to take care of one of our
children, an American child with an
American mother—we were told that
the President said he was going to be
focusing on criminals, and these
trumped-up charges, where they admit
in court they made a mistake but write
such mocking things to judges like
‘‘Oopsie’’ on social media, this cruelty—this is not who we are.
So let’s talk about the Constitution
first, the Fifth and the 14th Amendments.
The Fifth and 14th Amendments say
that no one should shall be deprived of
life, liberty, or property without the
due process of law. The central promise
of those words is an assurance that all
levels of the American Government
must operate within the law and the
bounds of this Constitution. Everybody
in this Chamber swears an oath to uphold the Constitution.
But every single day, it just seems
our President is challenging constitutional principles. He is pushing past
constitutional boundaries. Every day,
we are hearing new stories of immigrants—some here illegally, some
awaiting trial, most charged with no
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.103 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1993
crime—being rounded up, detained, arrested, deported, and often just ‘‘disappeared.’’ This is happening without
charges, evidence, trials, hearings—
without, as the Constitution says, due
process.
This is what other governments have
done. We have talked about it. On the
Foreign Relations Committee, we complain about it to nations across the
Earth when they do not show due process, when they disappear people. Maybe
you are an immigrant who has never
broken the law. Maybe you are a citizen. Even if you think the administration’s immigration agenda doesn’t
apply to you, please know that the
reckless behavior we are seeing erodes
all of our rights.
As for the American mother and the
American child right now whose husband was unjustly and illegally deported and is right now in an El Salvadorian prison, think about that.
Denying due process is a slippery
slope. We have seen it in other countries. With democratic backsliding, it
is a slippery slope. If people can be detained and deported without a hearing,
detained and deported without due
process, without seeing a judge, nothing will stop them from slipping toward deporting others and making mistakes with an American.
I am one of these people in this body
who think our immigration system is
in desperate need of reform. It was last
updated 40 years ago, so 40 years ago
was the last time we acted to update
our immigration laws. The failure to
update our laws has resulted in our
country’s inability to manage unprecedented levels of immigration—not just
affecting our country but affecting others. It is an unprecedented influx of applications to enter the United States,
which has put pressure and strain on
our immigration system and has
slowed down the processing times for
millions of people trying to immigrate
or naturalize legally and made it more
difficult to incentivize the world’s
brightest minds to come here to contribute to our country’s long-term success.
For millions of Americans, immigration is not a political issue; it is a personal one. There are immigrants
around my State and in every State
who have waited year after year for
Congress to find a bipartisan agreement to improve our system in ways
that most Americans agree on, whether
you are right or left. They have been
waiting for people in Congress to fix
our outdated immigration laws, to secure our borders, to dedicate the resources necessary for USCIS to fix the
outrageously long processing times for
immigration and provide a pathway to
legal status for long-term American
residents who have followed our laws
and have contributed to our society.
Some of them know no other country
because they came here when they
were just months old.
Our immigration laws are so outdated that even the conservative Cato
Institute published a comprehensive
policy analysis in 2023, titled ‘‘Why
Legal Immigration is Nearly Impossible.’’ In it, the Cato Institute explains:
Today, fewer than 1 percent of the people
who want to move permanently to the
United States can do so legally. Legal immigration is less like waiting in line and more
like winning the lottery. It happens, but it is
so rare that it is irrational to expect it in
any individual case.
The Cato Institute continues:
For some immigrants, this restrictive system sends them into the black market of illegal immigration. For others, it sends them
to other countries, where they contribute to
the quality of life in their new homes. And
for still others, it requires them to remain in
their homeland, often underemployed and
sometimes in danger. Whatever the outcome,
the system punishes both . . . prospective
immigrants and Americans who would associate, contract, and trade with them. Congress and the administration can do better.
I have met with conservatives, I have
met with business groups, and I have
met with agricultural leaders who all
talk to commonsense things we should
be doing to improve our immigration
system—to protect our borders, yes,
but to improve our economy, to improve our scientific research, and to
improve our quality of life.
The only way to fix our broken immigration system is for Congress to fix it,
to pass comprehensive immigration reform. But instead of a leader—strong
leaders who go before Congress taking
on the most complex issues but yet
have the courage to stand before Congress and pull them together to do hard
things—instead of doing that, the last
time we made progress in this body,
President Trump actively blocked bipartisan legislation. Now he has imposed policies that aren’t just going
after criminals; they are dragging in so
many others.
When President Trump stopped Republicans from voting on the bipartisan bill that was negotiated in the
Senate last year, he stopped us from
making strides towards the larger fixes
we need.
The administration’s immigration
plans are not helping American citizens who are submitting applications
so that their spouse or fiance who is
waiting in another country can finally
join them in the United States.
The administration right now is not
helping American citizens who have
been waiting for years for a visa for
their brother or their sister or their
mother or their father. Uniting families is an American value.
Americans aren’t getting any relief
from these extraordinarily long wait
times. On the USCIS website, you can
check the average processing time for
these cases, and most Americans would
be shocked—maybe even horrified—to
learn just how long it will take for you
as an American citizen to bring a husband or a wife or even a child back to
the United States with you.
We checked this past weekend, and
here are the numbers. For the I–129 fiance visa, the processing time for 80
percent of the cases is 8 months to 3
years. For an I–130 visa, if you are a
U.S. citizen petitioning for your
spouse, parent, or minor child, then the
wait time is anywhere from 17 months
to 64 months. That is an average from
anywhere from a year and a half to
over 5 years. For an I–90, if your green
card is destroyed in a flood or a fire, 80
percent of people will be waiting for almost a year and a half—17 months—to
just get a new copy.
These numbers are shocking, and
they don’t even take into account long
wait times for visa appointments at
the U.S. consulate or Embassies. In
India, for example, the average wait
time for an appointment is well over
400 days.
American citizens, including thousands of my constituents in New Jersey, are so angry. They are waiting far
too long for their cases to be
prioritized and adjudicated.
But when Trump reallocates all the
resources within our immigration system to conducting the largest mass deportation of people in history, American citizens are paying the price not
just from USCIS processing times; we
pay the price because to do this, he is
diverting actual law enforcement resources away from solving crimes and
stopping terrorism. His actions are actually making us less safe. We pay the
price because these policies are eroding
constitutional principles as well as
making us less safe by taking law enforcement away from their efforts.
This plan is about conditioning
Americans to the suspension of due
process, first for immigrants. If we let
due process erode for immigrants, it
erodes for Americans.
Let me outline a little bit about how
this is happening and why this is a crisis.
Two weeks ago, Trump invoked the
Alien Enemies Act. The Alien Enemies
Act of 1798 allows the President to detain or deport the natives and citizens
of an enemy nation that we are at war
with—the 1798 Act. The President can
detain or deport these immigrants
without a hearing, with no due process,
even ones who are lawfully present in
the United States.
The Alien Enemies Act was last used
during one of our country’s darkest
moments—the internment of Japanese,
German, and Italian nationals during
World War II—but even then, we still
ensured that due process was followed.
Prior to detention, people subjected
to the Alien Enemies Act in the 1940s
appeared before the alien enemy hearing board, where they could at least
present evidence that they had no ties
to Axis powers.
As one circuit court judge recently
said of Trump’s use of the Alien Enemies Act:
There’s no regulations, and nothing was
adopted by the agency officials that were administering this. [The] people weren’t given
notice. They weren’t told where they were
going. They were given those people on those
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.105 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1994 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
planes on that Saturday and had no opportunity to file habeas or any type of action to
challenge the removal.
The standards of 1940 during World
War II were higher than the standards
of this President.
The following are people who Trump
has targeted and removed without
criminal charges, without a hearing,
without evidence, to a prison rife with
human rights abuses in El Salvador.
These are the people he has sent there:
a tattoo artist seeking asylum who entered the country legally; an aspiring
pop musician with a tattoo of a hummingbird; a 24-year-old who used to
teach swimming classes for children
with developmental disabilities and
has a tattoo of an autism awareness
ribbon in honor of his brother; a Venezuelan who had fled violence in Venezuela last year and came to the
United States to seek asylum. His lawyer wrote on social media:
ICE alleged that his tattoos are gang related. They are absolutely not. Our client
worked in the arts in Venezuela. He is gay,
LGBTQ. His tattoos are benign. He has no
criminal record.
Another Venezuelan removed to the
El Salvador prison is a barber with no
criminal history. Another is a professional soccer player, has a tattoo with
a soccer ball and rosary closely resembling the logo of his favorite soccer
team.
This is stunning what we are doing.
These people were swept up and sent to
another prison known for its human
rights abuses because they were Venezuelan and had tattoos, benign tattoos.
An article was published in one periodical about the anguish from families.
Here are a few excerpts from the article:
‘‘‘You’re here because of your tattoos.’ The
Trump administration sent Venezuelans to
El Salvador’s infamous prison. Their families are looking for answers.’’
On Friday, March 14, Arturo Suarez Trejo
called his wife, Nathali Sanchez, from an immigration detention center in Texas. Suarez,
a 33-year-old [male] native of Caracas, Venezuela, explained that his deportation flight
had been delayed. He told his wife he [still]
would be home soon. Suarez did not . . . go
back to Venezuela. Still, there was at least a
silver lining: In December, Sanchez had
given birth to their daughter, Nahiara.
Suarez would finally have a chance to meet
[their] three-month-old baby girl he had
[never] . . . ever seen.
But, Sanchez told [the outlet] she [had] not
heard from Suarez since. Instead, last weekend, she found herself zooming in on a photo
the government of El Salvador published of
Venezuelan men the Trump administration
had sent to President Nayib Bukele’s infamous Terrorism Confinement Center, or
CECOT. ‘‘I realized that one of them was my
husband,’’ she said. ‘‘I recognized him by
[his] tattoo . . . by his ear, and [a scar on]
his chin. Even though I couldn’t see his face,
I knew it was him.’’ The photo Sanchez examined . . . a highly produced propaganda
video promoted by Secretary of State . . .
and the White House—showed Venezuelans
shackled in prison uniforms as they were
pushed around by guards and had their heads
shaved.
The tattoo on Suarez’s neck is of a colibri,
a hummingbird. His wife said it is meant to
symbolize ‘‘harmony and good energy.’’ She
said his other tattoos, like a palm tree on his
hand—an homage to Suarez’s late mother’s
use of a Venezuelan expression about God
being greater than a coconut tree—were
similarly innocuous. [Needless to say], they
may be why Suarez has been effectively disappeared by the US government into a Salvadoran mega-prison.
We must keep our country safe from
violent criminals, people with long
criminal records who are not citizens. I
think every American would agree
they should be deported. Immigrants to
this country, surprisingly, have a much
lower rate of breaking laws. But if they
break laws, I agree.
Maybe you are an immigrant who has
never broken a law. Maybe you are a
naturalized citizen. Maybe you were
born here. The problem with this idea
of disappearing people with no due
process is that once that foundation is
laid, if they are able to defend that
lack of due process, to use that law
from the 1700s, we begin a process in
this country that even conservative
Justices of the Supreme Court said is
unjustifiable.
Denying people due process pushes us
down a road where more exceptions can
be made. You cannot deny fundamental
rights to another and not endanger
them for yourself.
We have created a system now, if
Trump is successful, where you can
just say, you can just claim, you can
just point to someone and say they are
from X country or claim that they are
part of a gang, and without any due
process, without any vetting, without
going before any independent arbitrator, you are disappeared because
there is just no way to challenge them.
No due process for noncitizens means
that we are a country in violation of
those ideals I talked about from here
that say at the beginning of this country, very simply, no one shall be deprived of life, liberty, or the pursuit of
property—no one—without due process
of law. As soon as we break that, as
soon as we violate that, we are going
down a road.
Antonin Scalia—I confess, I have disagreed with him on so many things,
but this conservative Justice once sat
in an interview with Ruth Bader Ginsburg. They had a relationship that I
think was special, and it shows that
even people who have distinctly different views can still make real human
connection in our country. They were
asked by an interviewer whether undocumented people have the five freedoms—freedom of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of the press, freedom
of assembly, and freedom to petition
the government—and here is what the
conservative Justice Scalia said:
Oh, I think so. I think anybody who is
present in the United States has protections
under the United States Constitution. Americans abroad have that protection. Other
people abroad do not. They don’t have the
protections of our Constitution, but anyone
who is present in the United States has the
protections of the United States Constitution.
Antonin Scalia, one of the most conservative members of the highest Court
in our land.
And, of course, Ginsburg—his ideological opposite—she concurred when
she said:
When we get to the 14th Amendment, it
doesn’t speak of citizens as some constitutions grant rights to citizens, but our Constitution says ‘‘persons’’ and that the person
is every person who is here in our country,
documented or undocumented.
Our Constitution is clear on the face.
If you are an originalist like Antonin
Scalia, and you read the Constitution’s
words, you have to stand for the idea
that no one should be denied due process; that the government can’t walk up
to a human being and grab them off the
street and put them on a plane and
send them to one of the most notorious
prisons in the world and just say, as
one of our authorities did, ‘‘Oopsie.’’
Think about that. And that happened
to a father of an American child. Think
about that. It happened to a husband of
an American woman. Think about
that. That happened to a man who a
judge already said he had the right to
stay.
When the rights of some are violated,
it is a threat to the rights of all of us.
In January, ICE agents in New Jersey
raided a small business without a warrant and detained a Puerto Rican military veteran, a Boricua, an American
citizen—detained him even after he
presented his valid ID to those ICE
agents. This is one example of so many.
Some Americans Have Already Been
Caught in Trump’s Immigration Dragnet.
More Will Be.
An article by Nicole Foy.
About a week after President Donald
Trump took office, Jonathan Guerrero was
sitting at the Philadelphia car wash where
he works when immigration agents burst in.
The agents didn’t say why they were there
and didn’t show their badges, Guerrero recalled. So the 21-year-old didn’t get a chance
to explain that although his parents were
from Mexico, he had been born right there
in—
The ‘‘City of Brotherly Love.’’
An agent pointed his gun at Guerrero and
handcuffed him. Then they brought in other
car wash workers, including Guerrero’s father, who is undocumented. When agents
began checking IDs, they finally noticed
that Guerrero was a citizen and quickly let
him go.
‘‘I said, ‘Look, man, I don’t know who
these guys are and what they’re doing,’’ said
Guerrero. ‘‘With anything law-related, I just
stay quiet.’’
Less than two months into the new Trump
administration, there has been a small but
steady beat of—
More and more—
reported cases like Guerrero’s.
In Utah, agents pulled over and detained a
20-year-old American after he honked at
them. In New Mexico, a member of the Mescalero Apache nation more than two hours
from the border was questioned by agents
who demanded to see their passport. Earlier
this month, a Trump voter in Virginia was
pulled over and handcuffed by gun-wielding
immigration agents.
It’s unclear exactly how many citizens
have faced the Trump administration’s dragnet so far. And while previous administrations have mistakenly held Americans too,
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.106 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1995
there’s no firm count of those incidents either.
The government does not release figures on
citizens who have been held by immigration
authorities. Neither Customs and Border
Protection nor Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, which handles interior immigration enforcement.
Experts and advocates say that what is
clear to them is that Trump’s aggressive immigration policies—such as arrest quotas for
enforcement agents—make it likely that
more citizens will get caught up in immigration sweeps.
‘‘It’s really everyone—not just noncitizens
or undocumented people—who are in danger
of having their liberty violated in this kind
of mass deportation machinery.’’
Asked about reports of Americans getting
caught up in administration’s enforcement
policies, an ICE spokesperson told—
The outlet—
in a written statement that agents are allowed to ask for citizens’ identification:
‘‘Any US immigration officer has authority
to question, without warrant, any alien or
person believed to be an alien concerning his
or her right to be, or to remain, in the
United States.’’ The agency did not respond
to questions about specific cases.
The U.S. has gone through spasms of detaining and even deporting large numbers of
citizens. In the 1930s and 1940s, federal and
local authorities forcibly exiled an estimated
1 million Mexican Americans, including hundreds of thousands of American-born children.
That is our past: An estimated 1 million Mexican Americans, including
hundreds of thousands of Americanborn children, swept up and deported.
[A] U.S. Government Accountability Office
report found that immigration authorities
asked to hold roughly 600 likely citizens during Trump’s first term. The GAO also found
that Trump actually deported about 70 likely
citizens.
The GAO report did not get into any individual cases. But lawsuits brought against
federal immigration agencies detail dozens
of cases where plaintiffs received a settlement.
This will accelerate if there is no due
process. In its first administration,
there was some process, but this will
accelerate if there is no due process.
I live in Newark, NJ, and there are
dozens of languages spoken in my city.
And some of the elders from some of
these many different ethnic groups—
from European folks who don’t speak
English to folks from Asia that don’t
speak English—imagine one of these
Americans gets stopped and doesn’t
have papers on them, and they see a
tattoo and, next thing you know, they
are sent to Louisiana or Texas. The
next thing you know, they are on a
flight.
That is not hyperbole. That is not
some impossible thing. We know, once
due process is eliminated in this country for some, all are in danger. It is a
constitutional slippage that Scalia and
conservatives who believe in the Constitution nobly object to.
Canadian citizen Jasmine Mooney
was detained by ICE for 2 weeks. I saw
an interview of her, this White woman,
stunned. Here is what she wrote, this
Canadian:
There was no explanation, no warning. One
minute, I was in an immigration office talking to an officer about my work visa, which
had been approved months before and allowed me, a Canadian, to work in the US.
The next, I was told to put my hands against
the wall, and patted down like a criminal before being sent to an ICE detention center
without the chance to talk to a lawyer.
I grew up in Whitehorse, Yukon, a small
town in the northernmost part of Canada. I
always knew I wanted to do something bigger with my life. I left home early and moved
to Vancouver, British Columbia, where I
built a career spanning multiple industries—
acting in film and television, owning bars
and restaurants, flipping condos and managing Airbnbs.
In my 30s, I found my true passion working
in the health and wellness industry. I was
given the opportunity to help launch an
American brand of health tonics called Holy!
Water—a job that would involve moving to
the US.
I was granted my trade . . . work visa,
which allows Canadian and Mexican citizens
to work in the US in specific professional occupations, on my second attempt. It goes
without saying, then, that I have no criminal record. I also love the US and consider
myself to be a kind, hard-working person.
I started working in California and travelled back and forth between Canada and the
US multiple times without any complications—until one day, upon returning to the
US, a border officer questioned me about my
initial visa denial and subsequent visa approval. He asked why I had gone to the San
Diego border the second time to apply. I explained that that was where my lawyer’s offices were, and that he had wanted to accompany me to ensure there were no issues.
After a long interrogation, the officer told
me it seemed ‘‘shady’’ and that my visa
hadn’t been properly processed. He claimed I
also couldn’t work for a company in the US
that made use of hemp—one of the beverage
ingredients. He revoked my visa, and told me
I could still work for the company from Canada, but if I wanted to return to the US, I
would need to reapply.
I was devastated; I had just started building a life in California. I stayed in Canada
for the next few months, and was eventually
offered a similar position with a different
health and wellness brand.
I restarted the visa process and returned to
the same immigration office at the San
Diego border, since they had processed my
visa before and I was familiar with it. Hours
passed, with many confused opinions about
my case. The officer I spoke to was kind but
told me that, due to my previous issues, I
needed to apply for my visa through the consulate. I told her I hadn’t been aware I needed to apply that way, but had no problem
doing it.
Then she said something strange: ‘‘You
didn’t do anything wrong. You are not in
trouble, you are not a criminal.’’
I remember thinking: Why would she say
that? Of course I’m not a criminal!
She then told me they had to send me back
to Canada. That didn’t concern me; I assumed I would simply book a flight home.
But as I sat searching for flights, a man approached me.
‘‘Come with me,’’ he said.
There was no explanation, no warning. He
led me to a room, took my belongings from
my hands and ordered me to put my hands
against the wall. A woman immediately
began patting me down. The commands came
rapid-fire, one after another, too fast to
process.
They took my shoes and pulled out my
shoelaces.
‘‘What are you doing? What is happening?’’
I asked.
‘‘You are being detained.’’
‘‘I don’t understand. What does that mean?
For how long?’’
‘‘I don’t know.’’
That would be the response to nearly every
question I would ask over the next two
weeks: ‘‘I don’t know.’’
They brought me downstairs for a series of
interviews and medical questions, searched
my bags and told me I had to get rid of half
my belongings because I couldn’t take everything with me.
‘‘Take everything with me where?’’ I
asked.
A woman asked me for the name of someone they could contact on my behalf. In moments like this, you realize you don’t actually know anyone’s phone number anymore.
By some miracle, I had recently memorized
my best friend Britt’s number because I had
been putting my grocery points on her account.
I gave them her phone number.
They handed me a mat and a folded-up
sheet of aluminum foil.
‘‘What is this?’’
‘‘Your blanket.’’
‘‘I don’t understand.’’
I was taken to a tiny, freezing cement cell
with bright fluorescent lights and a toilet.
There were five other women lying on their
mats with the aluminum sheets wrapped
over them, looking like dead bodies. The
guard locked the door behind me.
For two days, we remained in that cell,
only leaving briefly for food. The lights
never turned off, we never knew what time it
was and no one answered our questions. No
one in the cell spoke English, so I either
tried to sleep or meditate to keep from having a breakdown. I didn’t trust the food, so I
fasted, assuming I wouldn’t be there long.
On the third day, I was finally allowed to
make a phone call. I called Britt and told her
that I didn’t understand what was happening, that no one would tell me when I was
going home, and that she was my only contact.
They gave me a stack of paperwork to sign
and told me I was being given a five-year ban
unless I applied for re-entry through the consulate. The officer also said it didn’t matter
whether I signed the papers or not; it was
happening regardless.
I was so delirious that I just signed. I told
them I would pay for my flight home and
asked when I could leave.
No answer.
Then they moved me to another cell—this
time with no mat or blanket. I sat on the
freezing cement floor for hours. That’s when
I realized they were processing me into real
jail: The Otay Mesa Detention Center.
I was told to shower, given a jail uniform,
fingerprinted and interviewed. I begged for
information.
‘‘How long will I be here?’’
‘‘I don’t know your case,’’ the man said.
‘‘Could be days. Could be weeks. But I’m telling you right now—you need to mentally
prepare yourself for months.’’
Months.
I felt like I was going to throw up.
I was taken to the nurse’s office for a medical check. She asked what had happened to
me. She had never seen a Canadian there before. When I told her my story, she grabbed
my hand and said: ‘‘Do you believe in God?’’
I told her I had only recently found God,
but that I now believed in God more than
anything.
‘‘I believe God brought you here for a reason,’’ she said. ‘‘I know it feels like your life
is in a million pieces, but you will be OK.
Through this, I think you are going to find a
way to help others.’’
At the time, I didn’t know what that
meant. She asked if she could pray for me. I
held her hands and wept.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.108 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1996 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
I felt like I had been sent an angel.
I was then placed in a real jail unit: Two
levels of cells surrounding a common area,
just like in the movies. I was put in a tiny
cell alone with a bunk bed and a toilet.
The best part: There were blankets. After
three days without one, I wrapped myself in
mine and finally felt some comfort.
For the first day, I didn’t leave my cell. I
continued fasting, terrified that the food
might make me sick. The only available
water came from the tap attached to the toilet in our cells or a sink in the common area,
neither of which felt safe to drink.
Eventually, I forced myself to step out,
meet the guards and learn the rules. One of
them told me: ‘‘No fighting.’’
‘‘I’m a lover, not a fighter,’’ I joked. He
laughed.
I asked if there had ever been a fight here.
‘‘In this unit? No,’’ he said. ‘‘No one in this
unit has a criminal record.’’
That’s when I started meeting the other
women.
That’s when I started hearing their stories.
And that’s when I made a decision: I would
never allow myself to feel sorry for my situation again. No matter how hard this was, I
had to be grateful. Because every woman I
met was in an even more difficult position
than mine.
There were around 140 of us in our unit.
Many women had lived and worked in the US
legally for years but had overstayed their
visas—often after reapplying and being denied. They had all been detained without
warning.
If someone is a criminal, I agree they
should be taken off the streets. But not one
of these women had a criminal record. These
women acknowledged that they shouldn’t
have overstayed and took responsibility for
their actions. But their frustration wasn’t
about being held accountable; it was about
the endless, bureaucratic limbo they had
been trapped in.
The real issue was how long it took to get
out of the system, with no clear answers, no
timeline, and no way to move forward. Once
deported, many have no choice but to abandon everything they own because the cost of
shipping their belongings back is too high.
I met a woman who had been on a road trip
with her husband. She said they had 10-year
work visas. While driving near the San Diego
border, they mistakenly got into a lane leading to Mexico. They stopped and told the
agent they didn’t have their passports on
them, expecting to be redirected. Instead,
they were detained. They are both pastors.
I met a family of three who had been living
in the US for 11 years with work authorizations. They paid taxes and were waiting for
their green cards. Every year, the mother
had to undergo a background check, but this
time, she was told to bring her whole family.
When they arrived, they were taken into custody and told their status would now be
processed from within the detention center.
Another woman from Canada had been living in the US with her husband who was detained after a traffic stop. She admitted she
had overstayed her visa and accepted that
she would be deported. But she had been
stuck in the system for almost six weeks because she hadn’t had her passport. Who runs
casual errands with their passport?
One woman had a 10-year visa. When it expired, she moved back to her home country,
Venezuela. She admitted she had overstayed
by one month before leaving. Later, she returned for a vacation and entered the US
without issue. But when she took a domestic
flight from Miami to Los Angeles, she was
picked up by ICE and detained. She couldn’t
be deported because Venezuela wasn’t accepting deportees. She didn’t know when she
was getting out.
There was a girl from India who had overstayed her student visa for three days before
heading back home. She then came back to
the US on a new, valid visa to finish her
master’s degree and was handed over to ICE
due to the three days she had overstayed on
her previous visa.
There were women who had been picked up
off the street, from outside their workplaces,
from their homes. All of these women told
me that they had been detained for time
spans ranging from a few weeks to 10
months. One woman’s daughter was outside
the detention center protesting for her release.
That night, the pastor invited me to a
service she was holding. A girl who spoke
English translated for me as the women took
turns sharing their prayers—prayers for
their sick parents, for the children they
hadn’t seen in weeks, for the loved ones they
had been torn away from.
Then, unexpectedly, they asked if they
could pray for me. I was new here, and they
wanted to welcome me. They formed a circle
around me, took my hands and prayed. I had
never felt so much love, energy and compassion from a group of strangers in my life. Everyone was crying.
At 3am the next day, I was woken up in my
cell.
‘‘Pack your bag. You’re leaving.’’
I jolted upright. ‘‘I get to go home?’’
The officer shrugged. ‘‘I don’t know where
you’re going.’’
Of course. No one ever knew anything.
I grabbed my things and went downstairs,
where 10 other women stood in silence, tears
streaming down their faces. But these
weren’t happy tears. That was the moment I
learned the term ‘‘transferred’’.
For many of these women, detention centers had become a twisted version of home.
They had formed bonds, established routines
and found slivers of comfort in the friendships they had built. Now, without warning,
they were being torn apart and sent somewhere new. Watching them say goodbye,
clinging to each other, was gut-wrenching.
I had no idea what was waiting for me
next. In hindsight, that was probably for the
best.
Our next stop was Arizona, the San Luis
Regional Detention Center. The transfer
process lasted 24 hours, a sleepless, grueling
ordeal. This time, men were transported
with us. Roughly 50 of us were crammed into
a prison bus for the next five hours, packed
together—women in the front, men in the
back. We were bound in chains that wrapped
tightly around our waists, with our cuffed
hands secured to our bodies and shackles restraining our feet, forcing every movement
into a slow, clinking struggle.
When we arrived at our next destination,
we were forced to go through the entire intake process all over again, with medical
exams, fingerprinting—and pregnancy tests;
they lined us up in a filthy cell, squatting
over a communal toilet, holding Dixie cups
of urine while the nurse dropped pregnancy
tests in each of our cups. It was disgusting.
We sat in freezing-cold jail cells for hours,
waiting for everyone to be processed. Across
the room, one of the women suddenly spotted
her husband. They had both been detained
and were now seeing each other for the first
time in weeks.
The look on her face—pure love, relief and
longing—was something I’ll never forget.
We were beyond exhausted. I felt like I was
hallucinating.
The guard tossed us each a blanket: ‘‘Find
a bed.’’
There were no pillows. The room was ice
cold, and one blanket wasn’t enough. Around
me, women lay curled into themselves, heads
covered, looking like a room full of corpses.
This place made the last jail feel like the
Four Seasons.
I kept telling myself: Do not let this break
you.
Thirty of us shared one room. We were
given one Styrofoam cup for water and one
plastic spoon that we had to reuse for every
meal. I eventually had to start trying to eat
and, sure enough, I got sick. None of the uniforms fit, and everyone had men’s shoes on.
The towels they gave us to shower were hand
towels. They wouldn’t give us more blankets.
The fluorescent lights shined on us 24/7.
Everything felt like it was meant to break
you. Nothing was explained to us. I wasn’t
given a phone call. We were locked in a
room, no daylight, with no idea when we
would get out.
I tried to stay calm as every fiber of my
being raged towards panic mode. I didn’t
know how I would tell Britt where I was.
Then, as if sent from God, one of the women
showed me a tablet attached to the wall
where I could send emails. I only remembered my CEO’s email from memory. I typed
out a message, praying he would see it.
He responded.
Through him, I was able to connect with
Britt. She told me that they were working
around the clock trying to get me out. But
no one had any answers; the system made it
next to impossible. I told her about the conditions in this new place, and that was when
we decided to go to the media.
She started working with a reporter and
asked whether I would be able to call her so
she could loop him in. The international
phone account that Britt had previously
tried to set up for me wasn’t working, so one
of the other women offered to let me use her
phone account to make the call.
We were all in this together.
With nothing to do in my cell but talk, I
made new friends—women who had risked
everything for the chance at a better life for
themselves and their families.
Through them, I learned the harsh reality
of seeking asylum. Showing me their physical scars, they explained how they had paid
smugglers anywhere from $20,000 to $60,000 to
reach the US border, enduring brutal jungles
and horrendous conditions.
One woman had been offered asylum in
Mexico within two weeks but had been encouraged to keep going to the US. Now, she
was stuck, living in a nightmare, separated
from her young children for months. She
sobbed, telling me how she felt like the
worst mother in the world.
Many of these women were highly educated
and spoke multiple languages. Yet, they had
been advised to pretend they didn’t speak
English because it would supposedly increase
their chances of asylum.
Some believed they were being used as examples, as warnings to others not to try to
come.
Women were starting to panic in this new
facility, and knowing I was most likely the
first person to get out, they wrote letters
and messages for me to send to their families.
It felt like we had all been kidnapped,
thrown into some sort of sick psychological
experiment meant to strip us of every ounce
of strength and dignity.
We were from different countries, spoke
different languages and practiced different
religions. Yet, in this place, none of that
mattered. Everyone took care of each other.
Everyone shared food. Everyone held each
other when someone broke down. Everyone
fought to keep each other’s hope alive.
I got a message from Britt. My story had
started to blow up in the media.
Almost immediately after, I was told I was
being released.
My ICE agent, who had never spoken to
me, told my lawyer I could have left sooner
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.110 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1997
if I had signed a withdrawal form, and that
they hadn’t known I would pay for my own
flight home.
From the moment I arrived, I begged every
officer I saw to let me pay for my own ticket
home. Not a single one of them ever spoke to
me about my case.
To put things into perspective: I had a Canadian passport, lawyers, resources, media
attention, friends, family and even politicians advocating for me. Yet, I was still detained for nearly two weeks.
Imagine what this system is like for every
other person in there.
A small group of us were transferred back
to San Diego at 2 am—one last road trip,
once again shackled in chains. I was then
taken to the airport, where two officers were
waiting for me. The media was there, so the
officers snuck me in through a side door, trying to avoid anyone seeing me in restraints.
I was beyond grateful that, at the very least,
I didn’t have to walk through the airport in
chains.
To my surprise, the officers escorting me
were incredibly kind, and even funny. It was
the first time I had laughed in weeks.
I asked if I could put my shoelaces back
on.
‘‘Yes,’’ one of them said with a grin. ‘‘But
you better not run.’’
‘‘Yeah,’’ the other added. ‘‘Or we’ll have to
tackle you in the airport. That’ll really
make the headlines.’’
I laughed, then told them I had spent a lot
of time observing the guards during my detention and I couldn’t believe how often I
saw humans treating other humans with
such disregard. ‘‘But don’t worry,’’ I joked.
‘‘You two get five stars.’’
When I finally landed in Canada, my mom
and two best friends were waiting for me. So
was the media. I spoke to them briefly, numb
and delusional from exhaustion.
It was surreal listening to my friends recount everything they had done to get me
out: Working with lawyers, reaching out to
the media, making endless calls to detention
centers, desperately trying to get through to
ICE or anyone who could help. They said the
entire system felt rigged, designed to make
it nearly impossible for anyone to get out.
The reality became clear: ICE detention
isn’t just a bureaucratic nightmare. It’s a
business. These facilities are privately
owned and run for profit.
Companies like CoreCivic and GEO Group
receive government funding based on the
number of people they detain, which is why
they lobby for stricter immigration policies.
It’s a lucrative business: CoreCivic made
over $560m from ICE contracts in a single
year. In 2024, GEO Group made more than
$763m from ICE contracts.
The more detainees, the more money they
make. It stands to reason that these companies have no incentive to release people
quickly. What I had experienced was finally
starting to make sense.
This is not just my story. It is the story of
thousands and thousands of people still
trapped in a system that profits from their
suffering. I am writing in the hope that
someone out there—someone with the power
to change any of this—can help do something.
The strength I witnessed in those women,
the love they gave despite their suffering, is
what gives me faith. Faith that no matter
how flawed the system, how cruel the circumstances, humanity will always shine
through.
Even in the darkest places, within the
most broken systems, humanity persists.
Sometimes, it reveals itself in the smallest,
most unexpected acts of kindness: A shared
meal, a whispered prayer, a hand reaching
out in the dark. We are defined by the love
we extend, the courage we summon and the
truths we are willing to tell.
That is the end of the article.
The stories continue. A 10-year-old
citizen in Texas recovering from brain
cancer was detained at a Border Patrol
checkpoint and, eventually, the American citizen was deported to Mexico
with her undocumented parents, even
though they were in need of medical
attention for their brain cancer.
Here is the article from NBC: ‘‘U.S.
citizen child recovering from brain
cancer removed to Mexico with undocumented parents.’’
A family that was deported to Mexico
hopes it can find a way to return to the U.S.
and ensure their 10-year-old daughter—
My fellow American—
who is a U.S. citizen, can continue her brain
cancer treatment.
Immigration authorities removed the girl
and four of her American siblings from Texas
on Feb. 4, when they deported their undocumented parents.
The family’s ordeal began last month,
when they were rushing from Rio Grande
City, where they lived, to Houston, where
their daughter’s specialist doctors are based,
for an emergency medical checkup.
The parents had done the trip at least five
other times in the past, passing through an
immigration checkpoint every time without
any issues, according to attorney Danny
Woodward from the Texas Civil Rights
Project, a legal advocacy and litigation organization representing the family. In previous occasions, the parents showed letters
from their doctors and lawyers to the officers at the checkpoint to get through.
But in early February, the letters weren’t
enough. When they stopped at the checkpoint, they were arrested after the parents
were unable to show legal immigration documentation. The mother, who spoke exclusively to NBC News, said she tried explaining
her daughter’s circumstances to the officers,
but ‘‘they weren’t interested in hearing
that.’’
Other than lacking ‘‘valid immigration
status in the U.S.,’’ the parents have ‘‘no
criminal history,’’ Woodward said.
Protection, which detained and deported
the family, according to the lawyer, said in
an e-mail Wednesday:
For privacy reasons, we do not comment
on individual cases.
On Thursday, a CBP spokesperson said via
email that the reports of the family’s situation are inaccurate because ‘‘when someone
is given expedited removal orders and chooses to disregard them, they will face the consequences’’ of the process.
They reiterated that they couldn’t speak
about the specifics of the case for privacy
reasons.
The 10-year-old girl was diagnosed with
brain cancer last year and underwent surgery to remove the tumor. Doctors ‘‘practically gave me no hope of life for her, but
thank God she’s a miracle,’’ the mother said.
The American citizen is a miracle.
The swelling on the girl’s brain is still not
fully gone, the mother said, causing difficulties with speech and mobility of the right
side of her body. Before the family was removed from the U.S., the girl was routinely
checking in with doctors monitoring her recovery, attending rehabilitation therapies
and taking medication to prevent convulsions.
‘‘It’s a very difficult thing,’’ the
mother said. ‘‘I don’t wish anyone to go
through this situation.’’
‘‘What is happening to this family is
an absolute tragedy and is something
that is not isolated to just them,’’ said
Rochelle Garza, president of the Texas
Civil Rights Project.
‘‘This is part of a pattern in practice
that we’ve seen in the Trump administration,’’ Garza said, adding that she
has heard of multiple other cases concerning mixed-status families. But for
now, this is the only case of this nature
the organization has taken on.
The Trump administration’s border czar
Tom Homan has said, ‘‘families can be deported together,’’ regardless of status.
Homan said it would be up to the parents to
decide whether to depart the U.S. together
or leave their children behind.
But undocumented parents of U.S.-born
children, if picked up by immigration authorities, face the risk of losing custody of
their children. Without a power-of-attorney
document or a guardianship outlining who
will take care of their children left behind,
the children go into the U.S. foster care system, making it harder for the parents to regain custody in the future.
According to the girl’s mother, she recalled feeling like she could ‘‘not do anything,’’ she said in Spanish, ‘‘You’re between
a rock and a hard place.’’
NBC News is withholding the name of the
mother and the rest of the family members,
since they were deported to an area in Mexico that is known for kidnapping U.S. citizens.
In addition to the parents and their 10-
year-old sick daughter, four of their other
American children, ages 15, 13, 8, and 6, were
also in the car when they were detained.
Four of the five children were born in the
U.S.
According to the mother, the family was
taken to a detention center following the arrest, where the mom and daughters were separated from her husband and sons and she realized she wouldn’t be taking her daughter
to her doctors.
‘‘The fear is horrible. I can’t explain it, but
it’s something frustrating, very tough, something you wouldn’t wish on anyone,’’ she
said, adding that her sick daughter was laying on a cold floor beneath incandescent
lights.
Hours later, the family was placed in a van
and dropped on the Mexico side of a Texas
bridge. From there, they sought refuge in a
nearby shelter for a week.
Mom said that safety concerns keep them
up at night and the children haven’t been
able to go to school.
The 10-year-old daughter and 15-year-old
son, who lives with a heart disorder known
as Long QT syndrome, which causes irregular heartbeats and can be life-threatening if
not treated well, have not received the
healthcare they need in Mexico. The teen
wears a monitor that tracks his heart rate.
‘‘The authorities have my children’s lives
in their hands,’’ she said in tears.
The authorities have my children’s lives in
their hands.
Both parents arrived to the U.S. from Mexico in 2013 and settled in Texas hoping for ‘‘a
better life for their family,’’ the mother said.
She and her husband both worked a string of
different jobs to support their six children.
The couple also has a 17-year-old son they
left behind in Texas following their deportation.
Just two weeks ago, another undocumented mother in California caring for her
21-year-old daughter, a U.S. citizen undergoing treatment for bone cancer, was detained by immigration authorities and later
released under humanitarian parole.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.112 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S1998 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
‘‘We are calling on the government,’’ Garza
said, ‘‘to parole the family in, to correct the
harm . . . and to not do this to anyone else.’’
Mr. MURPHY. Will the Senator
yield?
Mr. BOOKER. I think I need to. I will
yield to a question. I will yield to a
question while retaining the floor. And
I thank my brother, I thank my friend
who has now stood with me for almost
11 hours.
Mr. MURPHY. Those are hard stories
to read, Senator BOOKER, but I appreciate your showing the coldness of this
current administration’s immigration
policy.
The tragedy to me is that there is an
opportunity to fix what is, undoubtedly, a broken immigration system,
and yet we are into day 71 and Donald
Trump has not proposed to us any proposals to fix the broken system. Instead what he is doing is spending like
a drunken sailor on an enforcement
system that wastes tens of millions of
taxpayer dollars.
You described this harrowing experience that this Canadian woman had,
and as I was listening to this 2-week
ordeal that she went through, being
transported from site to site, being
processed and reprocessed, as the top
Democrat on the Homeland Security
Subcommittee of Appropriations, I am
just cataloging in my brain how much
money that cost us. Ultimately, this
was somebody working in the United
States, this was somebody that posed
no threat to the U.S. citizens, but we
probably spent several million dollars
on that 2-week ordeal.
Overall, the Trump administration is
going to blow through all of the money
allocated to Border Patrol. They are
going to have to come back to Congress
for a massive additional appropriation,
all at the same time that they are
shuttering medical research in this
country; they are closing down Social
Security offices. There are measles
outbreaks all across the country.
Planes seem to be falling out of the sky
as the FAA is enduring layoffs. There
are consequences to these spending decisions.
The amount of money that is being
spent at the border, much of it wasted
in a showy, ineffective response, the
consequence of that is that the services
that the average, everyday Americans
need, like help on their Social Security
claims, are being impacted.
But we need to fix the broken immigration system, and we had an opportunity to do that last year when Republicans and Democrats came together and wrote a bipartisan border
security bill that, frankly, would have
allocated tens of billions of additional
dollars that would have fixed our broken asylum system, would have given
the President new authorities, and
Donald Trump instructed all the Republicans in this Chamber to oppose it.
In the end, I think four Senators, including the author, Senator LANKFORD,
supported it, but every other Republican here opposed it. And the reason
Donald Trump told them to oppose it
was that he would fix it when he became President. But we are now in day
72, and there has not been a single proposal from Donald Trump to fix the
broken immigration system, just a
whole bunch of spending, essentially
money down the drain because the system itself needs to be reformed.
And so it speaks to my confident belief that Donald Trump does not want
to fix our immigration system. He
wants to keep this issue open as a sore
in our politics. If I were wrong, he
would have proposed legislation here to
deal with the underlying inefficiency of
the system, instead of just throwing
money at the problem.
And so we will see what the result of
this campaign is. We were told that immigrants to this country represented a
very specific national security threat;
that we needed to crack down on immigration, including expelling from this
country legitimate asylum seekers because that was what was necessary to
protect the Nation. Well, we will see
what the crime data tells us for the
first few months of this administration.
I have a feeling I already know what
the story is; crime is not going to have
gone down. Why? Because, in fact,
whether people want to acknowledge
this or not, natural-born American
citizens commit crimes at rates higher
than first-generation immigrants or
people born outside of the United
States of America.
But Senator BOOKER, I guess the
question I want to ask you is this: I
think you and I agree that Americans
right, left, and center acknowledge
that the immigration system is broken. They didn’t love it when they saw
thousands of people crossing on an average day. And they know that when it
takes 10 years to process an asylum
claim, something is wrong, and that it
then just provides incentive for people
to come here without documentation.
But my impression is that the cross
section of Americans that believes that
the existing immigration system is
broken also believes three other things:
One, that the way to fix it is to change
the laws, and they believe that we have
not done our job until we have changed
the laws; for instance, building a better
asylum system. And once again, not a
single proposal from the Trump administration on how to fix our broken immigration system, not a single proposal.
Second, I believe that they understand that immigration is a core
strength of this Nation, not a liability,
and that if we want to thrive as an
economy, we are going to have to bring
people to this country legally. But to
turn our backs on immigration as a
mechanism to grow economically, that
is not in line with what Americans believe, even those that think the existing system is broken.
And then, lastly, I just don’t believe
this country is as mean as Donald
Trump thinks it is.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes. Yes, yes.
Mr. MURPHY. I get it that everybody
wants this Nation to be a nation of
laws, but when an American citizen
looks at a child with a medical condition, when an American citizen looks
at an individual who will face certain
death from a drug gang if they stay in
their home country, when they look at
individuals in war-torn nations overseas, they believe that America is
strong enough, is big enough, is generous enough to be able to protect
those people from harm. Why? Because
that is what America always has been.
And so this idea that President
Trump has that Americans are mean
and spiteful and don’t want to help
people just because they were born outside of the United States or their parents were born outside of the United
States, I just don’t think that is right.
It obviously betrays the best traditions
of this Nation, but I think it also fundamentally misreads the American
people.
So I think people want our immigration to be fixed, the system to be fixed,
but I think they want us to do it. They
understand the laws are broken. They
do not want to abandon America’s tradition of bringing people here from all
around the world.
They understand that our economy
and our economic prosperity is linked
to our ability to bring hard-working
immigrants to this country, and they
are just not as mean as Donald Trump
thinks they are.
Mr. BOOKER. Senator, I appreciate
your question, but I just have to say
this to you. You worked so hard with
Senator LANKFORD, and one of the
things I have to say—and I hope I don’t
hurt his politics by telling people how
much I love Senator LANKFORD. We disagree fundamentally on a lot of issues,
maybe that will help. We both are people, though, of faith. We just recently
worked together in a massive—I think
there must have been like a thousand
people there, maybe 500 at least, at a
National Prayer Breakfast event. He is
such a man of character. What I like
about him, I know his values because
every day, he tries to be a good Christian.
(Mrs. MOODY assumed the Chair.)
And this idea of love thy neighbor or
you are a stranger in a strange land—
I just took a lot of pleasure watching
you, my friend, whom I have known for
the last 12 years, and sitting down in
this honest, sincere negotiation.
Let’s be real. Everybody on your side
of the aisle didn’t agree with you, and
everybody, before Trump’s involvement, on his side of the aisle didn’t
agree, but you guys had the makings of
a comprehensive bill that would have
passed.
I tell you also I came in here in 2013
right after the Gang of 8. They did the
same thing. They got the bill out, and
it died in the House.
There are people in America, despite
Lankford and you—who many people
would put on opposite sides of the political spectrum—on these issues, they
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.117 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1999
agree. Why do they agree, Senator
MURPHY? Because our economy is dependent upon immigration.
You want to talk about a conservative-leaning group, Senate moderate
Republicans, the national chamber of
commerce will tell you that our economy will be crippled if we don’t find a
way to bring more people in legally to
work on work visas.
When I go to the tech community or
the biotech community or the AI community or the community that is trying to go forward in quantum computing, all of them are saying this is
crazy that we are not allowing the
brightest minds on the planet—when
they get here and get Ph.D.s and have
things half of Congress can’t spell, that
we drop kick them out of the country.
There are so many points of agreement. Take Dreamers, who people on
both sides of the aisle held up as a
group of people that are Americans in
every way except for a piece of paper.
I could go through everything in the
immigration world we need to improve
on, including the need to secure our
southern border. I listened to you on
this section, and I look at you, and I
remember your frustration. You are
standing up in front of our caucus saying: We are so close.
Mr. MURPHY. Can the Senator
yield?
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield for a question while retaining the floor.
Mr. MURPHY. I just want to drill
down on this for a moment. It gets
back to a theme that you have been
hitting on throughout the evening and
early morning, and that is that not everything has to be zero-sum politics.
This is part of what is so exhausting
about the last 71 days for many, many
Americans. I think it is part of why
Donald Trump’s approval ratings are
tanking by the day.
You and I are pugilists when we need
to be, right? We fight when we think
that there is a worthy fight. That is
what this is today—it is a fight. We understand it is a fight for our values.
But we don’t think everything has to
be a fight. We see our jobs as standing
up for our convictions but then finding
that common ground.
I did not expect to be in that room
with Senator LANKFORD. I was surprised, pleasantly, when we came to an
agreement. You spent months and
months hammering out really difficult
criminal justice reform with a colleague of yours that you have equal
numbers of disagreements with because
we feel like we have a call from our
constituents to fight but then find the
common ground.
But this administration has zero interest in common ground. Every single
day, they wake up thinking only about
conflict, thinking only about defeat of
their opposition. And they have been
frustrated because they have been trying to do a lot of illegal things, and the
courts have been telling them no. They
are now talking about extraordinary
measures, like impeaching judges or
defunding the courts.
Instead, they could reach out to
Democrats. They could decide to do
what every previous President has
tried to do, which is, instead of ramming through a one-side-only policy on
immigration, for instance, come to
people of good will on the opposing
party and try to work out a compromise.
This is what exhausts the American
people, is this administration’s complete and total unwillingness to find
common ground on anything. That is
not where the center of this country is.
On the issues of immigration, we
found common ground last year. It was
hard. It did not satisfy everyone. But
we have proven that on this issue—it is
hot. It is difficult for even family members to talk about it sometimes. Even
on this issue of immigration, we can
find that common ground.
So we are here—you are here because
there is a fight to be waged, but I think
we both wish on a litany of these topics
that we were instead sitting down with
our colleagues. But that is just not in
the DNA of this administration. That
is part of why this President is becoming more and more unpopular by the
day, is because they expect any President—any President—to make at least
a minimalist effort to try to reach out
and find compromise, and that never
happens from the Trump administration.
Mr. BOOKER. I thank you for the
question I see in there.
Again, great Presidents have great
ideas they bring to Congress, and they
fight to pull together and cobble together legislation that will last. The
problem we have right now is this
whiplash between Trump’s Executive
orders and Biden’s Executive orders
and Trump’s Executive orders, and it is
not solving the problems. We have
shown there is enough common ground
to do something on it.
I don’t want to stick with common
ground now, actually, because there
are some things in here that are not
common ground, like private prisons.
I am one of these folks that don’t
want to criticize. I have flown out to a
private prison down south to get a
tour. I met really kind and nice people.
But there is something problematic to
me about a profit motive for imprisoning, shackling, detaining, and holding people and this combination of that
and a corporate reality where you are
giving campaign contributions to people that will then turn around and give
you government contracts to restrict
the liberties of human beings.
The story that I read about this
woman feeling like they lied to her
lawyer and said if she had only said she
could pay for her own flight home, and
they were keeping her. Every day they
were keeping her, they were getting
more money from American taxpayers.
This isn’t a system designed for justice. This isn’t a system designed for
the rights of human beings in our country. This is a system that has every
day an incentive to deny liberty, to
hold people. It is wrong. It is wrong. It
is broken.
With a President that doesn’t care
about these things, that is giving
greater latitude so that more stories
like the Canadian woman’s story—it is
stunning.
I want to keep moving, though. I just
want to talk about children and the
way this system is extended to children. Last week, the government canceled a contract to provide legal services to 26,000 unaccompanied immigrant children.
Remember what Anton Scalia said
about due process in his strict interpretations of the literal writings of our
Founders.
So 26,000 unaccompanied migrant
children no longer have legal representation. We started on that idea. We
started on that idea. We started on the
idea—the 15th and 14th Amendment—
that ‘‘no one shall be deprived of life,
liberty, or property without due process,’’ and our country has now rolled
back.
Trump got rid of a policy that prevented ICE from arresting kids at
schools and people from their places of
worship. Now, every day, families face
the impossible choice of whether to
send a kid to school and risk permanent separation from their families.
There is a story from New Jersey.
Recently when I was home in Newark,
NJ, a woman in my neighborhood came
up to me to tell me a heartbreaking
story. One morning, she was on her
way to walk to school, and a mom of
other children—I won’t make this
anonymous. One of my closest friends—
she is like a sister to me. She lives in
The Ironbound in Newark. She was
very emotional because her neighbors
were so terrified that they came to her
and asked her to walk their children to
school. They were American children.
There are so many teachers and
school administrators who are speaking out now that they have been ordered that they must allow ICE to
enter their schools.
Trump has plans to revoke temporary protected status protection for
hundreds of thousands of people from
various countries—from Venezuela to
Haiti—paving the way for those deportations. We know who they are. He has
done this despite the State Department
maintaining a ‘‘Level 4: Do Not Travel’’ warning for Haiti and Venezuela
due to widespread violence, danger,
sexual assault, kidnappings, and more.
He claims that he is tough on crime
because he wants to go after child sexual abusers, but you are sending children running into schools and churches
and sending them back to environments that are known for sexual assaults on young girls.
The Department of Justice Office of
Civil Rights recently dropped its case
that it filed against Southwest Key,
the Nation’s largest provider of housing for migrant children, in which the
DOJ alleged sexual abuse and neglect
perpetrated against undocumented
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.119 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2000 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
children in Federal custody. It was a
case DOJ brought against this company, which housed migrant children,
because of alleged sexual abuse.
What did our government do under
Trump? They dropped charges. They
dropped charges. Why? Why? Children
being sexually assaulted—it is not
worth an investigation? Is it because
the administration thinks that pursuing the lawsuit and holding perpetrators accountable will somehow interfere with their immigration agenda?
They literally let alleged sex abusers
go free with no explanation—the hypocrisy.
Family detentions have restarted.
They failed in the past to meet basic
child welfare standards and exposed
children to trauma. The President’s
own Department of Homeland Security
concluded in 2018 that family detention
centers posed a high risk of harm to
children and families. Despite his own
Department of Homeland Security
back in 2018 saying that, they have restarted.
One of the points I want to make is
on crime. I was a mayor. The No. 1
issue my residents were concerned
about was fighting crime, fighting
crime, fighting crime.
I went back to Newark recently for a
horrible, tragic death of a police officer
by a 14-year-old with a ghost gun. It
was horrible. The sendoff—hundreds
and hundreds and hundreds of police officers from all over our State, from
New York. This police officer was murdered by a 14-year-old. I still pray for
his family, his mom.
As I was standing there looking at
this parade of police officers who were
waiting for the casket, I had police officers come to me and complain that
they are having a harder and harder
time in New Jersey solving crimes because now victims of crime—victims of
sexual assault, victims of robbery—who
happen to be undocumented are afraid
to go and talk to local police because
of all this rhetoric that is creating the
fear that they will be turned over to
ICE.
Imagine, in our country there are
people out there who are sexually assaulting people but who are getting
away with it because they are targeting immigrants. And if you don’t
think that hurts Americans’ safety,
you are wrong.
When you are afraid to go and talk to
police officers to report crimes, when
you are subverting people’s constitutional rights and incarcerating people
in foreign prisons with no criminal
records, it does harm to children.
We talked about all of the diverting
of law enforcement resources away
from investigating national security
threats, terrorism, drug smuggling,
human trafficking, illegal arms exports, financial crimes, and sex crimes.
It is taking law enforcement away
from investigating those crimes and
forcing all Federal law enforcement
Agencies to enforce boat-level immigration crimes or, I should say, undocumented people with no criminal
activity beyond their being in our
country.
Reuters wrote about this misguided
redirection of Federal resources. I will
read their article:
Federal agents who usually hunt down
child abusers are now cracking down on immigrants who live in the U.S. legally.
Homeland Security investigators who specialize in money laundering are raiding restaurants and other small businesses, looking
for immigrants who aren’t authorized to
work.
Agents who pursue drug traffickers and tax
fraud are being reassigned to enforce immigration law.
As U.S. President Donald Trump pledges to
deport ‘‘millions and millions’’ of ‘‘criminal
aliens,’’ thousands of federal law enforcement officers from multiple federal agencies
are being enlisted to take on new work as
immigration enforcers, pulling crime fighting resources away from other areas—from
drug trafficking and terrorism and sexual
abuse and fraud.
This account of Trump’s push to reorganize federal law enforcement—the most significant since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks—is based on interviews with
more than 20 current and former federal
agents, attorneys, and other federal officials.
Most had first-hand knowledge of the
changes. Nearly all spoke on the condition of
anonymity because they were not authorized
to discuss their work.
‘‘I do not recall ever seeing this wide spectrum of federal government resources all
being turned toward immigration enforcement,’’ said Theresa Cardinal Brown, the
former Homeland Security official who has
served in both Republican and Democratic
administrations. ‘‘When you are telling
agencies to stop what you are doing and do
this now, whatever else they were doing
takes a back seat.’’
In response to questions from Reuters,
Homeland Security Assistant Secretary
Tricia McLaughlin said the U.S. Government
is mobilizing federal and state law enforcement to find, arrest, and deport illegal
aliens. The [FBI] declined to respond to questions about its staffing. In a statement, the
FBI said it is ‘‘protecting the U.S. from
many threats.’’
The Trump administration has offered no
comprehensive accounting of the revamp.
But it echoes the aftermath of the 2001 attacks, when Congress created the Department of Homeland Security and pulled together 169,000 federal employees from other
agencies and refocused the FBI on battling
terrorism.
Trump’s hardline approach to deporting
immigrants has intensified America’s already stark partisan divide. The U.S. Senate’s No. 2 Democrat, Dick Durbin, described
the crackdown as a ‘‘wasteful, misguided diversion of resources’’. . . . It is ‘‘making
America less safe’’ by drawing agents and officials away from fighting corporate fraud,
terrorism, child sexual exploitation, and
other crimes.
The focus on immigration is drawing significant resources from other crime-fighting
departments, according to the more than 20
sources who spoke.
Until January, pursuing immigrants living
in the country illegally was largely the job
of two agencies: Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, or ICE, and Customs and Border Protection, with a combined staff of
80,000. Other Departments spent . . . [on
crime].
In Detroit—where immigration prosecutions have been rare—the number of people
charged with immigration offenses rose from
2 in February . . . to 19 last month.
Case managements records from the Justice Department show that fewer than 1% of
the cases brought to prosecutors by the DEA
and ATF over the past decade involve allegations that someone had violated immigration law.
Since January, however, DEA agents have
been ordered to reopen cases involving arrests up to five years old, where prosecutors
have declined to bring charges.
As Trump and billionaire Elon Musk flash
the size of the Federal Government bureaucracy, jobs that deal with immigration enforcement appear largely exempt.
In a January 31 email to ICE employees, a
human resources official told them they
wouldn’t be eligible for retirement buyouts
offered to some 2.3 million Federal workers.
‘‘All ICE positions are excluded,’’ said the
previously unreported email.
Mr. WELCH. Madam President, will
the Senator yield for a question.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I will yield for a
question while retaining the floor.
Mr. WELCH. Thank you.
Senator, I have been listening to
many of your hours of speech. You are
talking about immigration now, and I
have another question about the immigration policy.
You know, I think all of us understand that it is absolutely essential
that our country secure its borders,
and, from time to time, the country
forgets that. But I think we have had
this debate about immigration that has
been going on for several years.
I don’t know if the Senator had an
opportunity to address the opportunity
we had in the Senate when, last year,
there was a realization on the part of
both the Republicans and Democrats
that the only way we were going to get
a secure border and a beneficial, sensible immigration policy was to work
together. I know the Senator was
watching that very carefully when we
had the terrific work of Senator
LANKFORD from Oklahoma, Senator
MURPHY from Connecticut, and Senator
Sinema, of course, from Arizona.
Despite the enormous political tension that surrounds the immigration
issue, but for understandable reasons,
the three of them worked very hard
and came together for a tri-partisan
proposal, in effect—Senator Sinema, of
course, being the Independent, who always played a constructive role in trying to bring the parties together. What
was included in that legislation was a
major commitment—embraced by Senator MURPHY on behalf of the Democrats—for border security. There was
an acknowledgment that we have to
control our borders. It is really that
simple.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes. Yes.
Mr. WELCH. But when you control
your borders, you also have the opportunity to have an immigration policy
that the Congress and the President
think will benefit the American people.
That benefits us, of course, if there is
security at the border, but it also benefits us if we have legal immigration
that is controlled by the American people.
Of course, you know, I have noticed
that Elon Musk, who is against immigration and is for everything that
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.120 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2001
President Trump is for—he likes having very highly educated computer people who can help him go from very rich
to even richer. So he carves out an exception for people who will be beneficial and helpful to him in his various
enterprises.
But, you know, we have got in
Vermont a lot of dairy farms, and we
have a tourist industry, and we have a
really hard time filling those jobs. So
legal immigration can really be helpful
and constructive and beneficial to the
people of the State of Vermont.
I know, in talking to my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle, many of us in
our States have tourist industries, and
we have agricultural enterprises, just
to mention two, where the reality is we
don’t have the number of people we
need to fill those jobs. You know, it is
not just a matter of paying more, because I do think we have to be very
mindful that we want to do every single thing we can to help elevate the
wages of American workers.
And, by the way, this is a little bit of
an aside. Why in the world haven’t we
raised the minimum wage?
I mean, I know, Senator, you are for
that, and I certainly am. But it astonishes me that we still have it at—what
is it?—$7 or $7.50? I mean, it is unbelievable what the minimum wage is. A
lot of States have raised it. Vermont
certainly has.
But we, on immigration, had the opportunity and the bill and the will to
make enormous progress so that we
would have an immigration policy that
secured the border, had the validation
of bipartisan majorities in the House
and in the Senate, would have also addressed the issues about legal immigration that would help us strengthen our
economy, and also would have included
a pathway to citizenship for Dreamers—folks who were brought here by
their parents when they were 4 or 5 or
6 years old and whose only country
they know is the United States itself.
You know, my understanding from
talking to my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle is that there is an
enormous amount of respect for many
of these Dreamers, many of whom have
been heroes for us in the military.
So this is not a Republican—in my
view, it is not a Republican-Democratic situation. It is a desire on the
part of almost everyone in this body to
accommodate the reality of a child’s
being brought here by his parents,
going to school, getting an education,
serving his country—firefighters, marines, teachers—doing all these things
that are really helpful to our country,
and are here through absolutely no
fault of their own. If we were to require
them to be deported—and that is an effort that the current administration is
making—you literally would be taking
people who might be 30 or 40 years old
now, who have families, and send them
back to the country from which their
parents brought them. And they don’t
even speak the language, and, you
know, that obviously makes no sense.
When I talk to Vermonters who have
very, very strong views of having a
strong border and I ask them about
this situation, they think: Wait a
minute. Well, that is different. You
know, that is a person who lives here.
That is like my neighbor.
So I was so disappointed when we
were on the cusp of being able to get
this legislation passed when then-Candidate Trump, in his candid way, said,
‘‘Kill it,’’ and he was candid about why.
It would ‘‘give the Democrats a win.’’
I never saw this as a win for Democrats. You know, I saw this as a win for
America.
The reality is that, when we have to
do really hard things here—and we are
not doing hard things these days, but
when we are trying to do hard things
that are really important for the
American people—my experience is you
really do have to get to a bipartisan
place because, you know, we have lost
elections, and we lost the last one, and
that is on us. It is not on the voters.
They made a decision. That is their
right to do, and we have to learn, and
we have to listen. But when we were
listening and hearing loud and clear
from the American people that we
want a secure border and then we
worked with our colleagues on the
other side of the aisle to get a secure
border, why in the world would the
leader of the party kill it? Why? I
mean, we know the reason. He thought
it was good politics.
But this is not about what is good
partisan politics. It is about what is
good policy that is going to help the
American people.
So among the many things you are
focusing on, of course, is this question
of immigration, and this is incredibly
important. But I wanted to be clear
that I, as one Member of the U.S. Senate, am absolutely all in for the immigration reform that we need. And that
is a secure border. That is legal immigration as we determine the type of immigration that would be beneficial to
the American people and sustainable,
and it also includes a pathway to citizenship for these children who, in
many cases, were brought here by their
parents, who had no agency, no involvement whatsoever in the decision
to come here, how they got here.
Pardon me. For those of us who don’t
stay up all night, some of us use
alarms to wake up. So pardon me for
being here earlier than I thought I
would be here. And you are here maybe
later than you thought.
But you know, it is such a privilege
for you, and it is such a privilege for
me. It is such a privilege for the other
98 citizens of this country who serve
with us in the U.S. Senate that any
chance we get—any chance we get—to
do something that is helpful to the people we represent, don’t we want to grab
it? Don’t we want to do it?
And does it matter if our name lives
in memory that we were here? It
doesn’t. What matters is what we do
here and whether, when we leave, we
can look back and have the satisfaction of knowing we gave it our best.
There is enormous pressure on folks
in this job from the crosscurrents of
the political world that we live in. And
all of us are fallible. All of us have
plenty of opportunity to get it wrong,
and we do. But what I have seen in the
people I have admired on both sides of
the aisle—and I think of Senator
McCain, whom Senator MURPHY
worked with so much. There was a
heart and soul to that man, and it was
the heart and soul and his spirit that
guided him.
And when I think about immigration,
and we are talking about how tough it
is, he worked together with the socalled Gang of 8 to come up with a reform that this Senate passed years ago.
I was in the House then, and I remember being so excited—so excited—
when I heard that the Senate had actually come up with a proposal that just
made sense. It wasn’t perfect. What is?
You know, Senate to Earth: What is
perfect? We do the best we can, but
that is about it.
But do you know what? When I say
‘‘that is about it,’’ that is what life is.
Do your best and then move on.
By the way, that is one of the reasons
why I think, Senator, the bipartisanship, which we don’t have now at all,
but it has to ultimately—we have to
have enough humility to understand
that neither side has the answers. And
where we try in earnest to come up
with the best solution we can at the
moment, where we listen to each other,
what happens is that if we didn’t get it
fully right—and we never will—we understand that we have an opportunity
to fix it and make it better based on
that experience.
When there is just our way or the
highway, there is no resolution and no
progress. No. 1, you don’t get the bill
passed, as we saw with the immigration bill. Then, No. 2, if you get it
passed, the other side just tries to tear
it apart and repeal it as opposed to improve it.
Every single one of us knows that the
American people want progress. But
when what we are talking about is
something that is hard—and it truly is
hard, the issue of immigration—we are
talking about something that is hard
politically, that spirit of wanting to
get to a solution, that was what animated the work of Senator LANKFORD,
Senator MURPHY, and Senator Sinema.
They wanted to get to a solution, even
though they had significantly different
points of view going in on what was the
right outcome. But they wanted to get
to a solution where they represented
the points of view of the disparate
views of our caucus, and they came up
with a compromise that, by all accounts, would be such a better place for
us to be now than what we are in: no
progress.
We haven’t been able to act on that
immigration bill since the Senate
acted, with the leadership of Senator
McCain and others.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.122 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2002 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
I was mentioning how excited I was.
I was in the House at the time, and I
was so excited that this bill came over.
You know, Vermonters were asking me
all the time: PETER, we have got to do
something about our borders. We have
got to do something to make sure our
farmers don’t fear having their farms
raided and them not being able to milk
their cows. It is that essential, right?
And I am talking about a lot of pretty
conservative people, politically, who
politically sometimes agree with me,
sometimes don’t. But what was so exciting to me was that on the cusp of
this coming to the House, I was thinking: I am going to have a chance to
vote for secure immigration, securing
our borders, a rational immigration
plan, and I am going to be able to give
fairness to the Dreamers. I was so excited about that.
Then what happened is it was announced that the House would not even
take up the bill. Why? It was the same
reason that then-Candidate Trump proposed to his colleagues or to his party
members in the Senate: Kill it. And
why was that?
Really, in all candor, it is the most
cynical of all reasons. Sometimes people in politics prefer to have the issues
that they can fight about rather than
use the responsibility and opportunity
they have to solve the problem.
That is pretty much what happened
with that. And here we are, and we are
seeing it again.
You know, there is another thing
that is happening with the immigration policies of the current administration. There is a lot of cruelty, this part
of it. Yes, we have to have a secure border. Yes, criminals who came here illegally should be deported. But should
the consensus that we have about a secure border, about the legitimacy of
deporting criminals who are here illegally be used to justify a wholesale
roundup, where the people who are
rounded up are almost randomly
picked up on the basis of good information, but it is clear in this roundup,
where so many people were flown to
the jails in El Salvador, that the minimal amount of due process, which is inquiry into who is this person, where are
they from, does this tattoo mean they
are in a gang or is that a tattoo of
Mom—are we a society where we don’t
provide that minimal inquiry that is
called due process, that our country
was founded on? It appears, in many
cases, we haven’t done that.
Then, what we are seeing also is that
a number of people are being rounded
up who are here legally. They are here
on a student visa, and they published
an opinion in a school newspaper expressing their point of view about the
suffering in the Middle East. This
country, of course, is founded, among
other things, on the First Amendment
right to free speech. It is a pretty astonishing thing that people who express that, who are here legally, by the
way—legally, legally, legally. I want to
emphasize that—are suddenly confronted by people who are essentially
bearing masks, put in handcuffs, taken
away, and then put in a jail at some
unknown place until some maybe days
later when you find out where they are.
How does that solve the border crisis?
How does that protect the liberties
that have been the hallmark of the
United States of America since the
Constitution?
It is cruel to have a person who essentially ‘‘disappears.’’ That is the
term I know Senator MURPHY used
once and, I think, unfortunately, accurately.
We have a challenge. It is really not
who wins this vote, who wins that vote.
And it is not even who is in the majority and who is in the minority because
this country only works and this Senate only works when whatever your political views are, you approach the
problems that America has from the
perspective of your obligation as a U.S.
Senator to make progress, to make it
better.
I was in the State senate for 13 years.
I am not going to say my life has been
downhill since then, but what I so appreciated about the Vermont Senate—
and I learned, working with other people, that ‘‘bipartisan’’ doesn’t have a
meaning almost now because it is like
you have got to be on one side or the
other.
But I remember when I first went to
the State senate, Senator BOOKER, I
won an election that was an upset. So
I was feeling pretty good about myself.
When I got there, it was a majority in
the Republican Party, and I was ready
to cause trouble—not necessarily in
the John Lewis good way. It might
have been more of a PETER WELCH ego
way. I had a lot to learn.
What every member who was showing
up—and these two Republican Senators
who were just really icons for me in my
life, as it turns out, they and the Lieutenant Governor made decisions about
who would be on what committees. And
I really wanted to be on the Finance
Committee, but that is not a committee you get on when you just show
up and you have won an election and
you are acting like you are more important than you are. They put me on
the Finance Committee, and I said: I
am doomed.
The reason is, I know I had to cooperate. They had been so good to me and
so generous. They gave me a seat at
the table. It was such a thrill for me to
be able to actually sit at the table with
these people whom I held in such high
regard and who knew so much more
than me. But they invited me in. They
didn’t push me aside just because I had
different points views and was from a
different party.
A few years later, I became Senate
president, so I had a lot to do with who
was on what committees. And I remembered I started then the process that
we still do in Vermont, and I appointed
a number of Republicans to chair committees.
I was in the Senate a second time
with the now-Governor of Vermont,
Phil Scott, and he became the chair of
the Institutions Committee. That is a
big deal in Vermont. When I tell folks
we did that in Vermont, where sometimes you would appoint somebody
who is from the other party, they want
me to have a mental status exam
around here. You know, you just don’t
that kind of thing.
What I do know and what I do see is
that there are a lot of people here who
do have that—I will call it the MurphyLankford-Sinema attitude: Let’s solve
the problem. Let’s make progress.
Let’s find a way where we can move
ahead.
You are talking about immigration,
which because we have been going
around and around on this for so long
without making progress, it is almost
creating this cul-de-sac or this sinkhole where people think it is pointless;
why even talk about it; why try to
solve it.
It can’t be done. But we know it can
be done because we are the people here,
100 of us, that actually have the ability
to do it. And I would say we have the
responsibility to do it because it is a
serious issue that faces the American
people, and they are entitled to the
safety of a secure border. The Dreamers are entitled to some justice and respect for the commitment they have
made to be fully participating citizens
here in the United States.
So I just applaud the efforts of my
colleagues who, despite all of the outside noise, do want to make some
progress. When we don’t make
progress, we descend into a bad place.
You know, yes, deport a criminal.
Our people are entitled to safety. People are not entitled to come here illegally, and people who are illegally here
certainly are not entitled to commit
any crimes.
But when we go round and round and
just use the challenge of immigration
reform as a political cudgel, we end up
going into some pretty dark places.
And that is where we are heading now,
where a person gets rounded up who is
legally here because the administration doesn’t like the opinion they expressed. It is not that their opinion was
necessarily subversive. It is not even
wrong; it is debatable. You and I would
have an opportunity to debate, you
know, what should be our policy in the
Middle East, what should be our policy
on immigration.
But the administration decides: That
speech, I don’t like. Arrest that person.
Disappear that person.
And then we get into debates that are
really not about making progress but
mutual recrimination.
So I am just very delighted that you
are focusing a good part of your effort
here on the vital question of immigration.
I do hope—I haven’t been watching
everything, but if it is OK, I just want
to direct your attention to these tariffs
that are happening a little bit. I know
you are going to have an opportunity
to talk about a fair number of things;
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.123 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2003
you already have. But I have never
seen anything so dumb and reckless as
these tariffs on Canada.
We have a library in Newport, VT—
Derby Line, actually—the Haskell Free
Library. And half of it is in Vermont,
and half of it is in Canada. Is that cool
or what? Canadians come in what I call
the backdoor but they call the front
door, and we come in the front door
which they call the backdoor, and we
read books together. We have had this
library for decades.
We had a roundtable up on the Canada-Vermont border, and the Member
of Parliament from Stanstead, which is
the town next to Newport, Madam
Bibeau, was with us. And we were with
some folks who ran businesses on the
Vermont side and on the Canadian side
and some of whom had operations on
both sides. Most of these were family
businesses; some were very large, some
were small. They ranged from, like,
farmers on the Vermont side, who got
a lot of their fertilizer from Canada.
And that is true, by the way, all across
the northern border. It can be Minnesota. It can be Idaho. So many of our
farmers all along the Canadian border
have cross-relationships with Canada.
They get their fertilizer. It is going to
cost 25 percent more.
We all know how hard our farmers
work. Nobody works harder. The margins of what they make are tiny. And
you add a 25-percent tariff, and these
people are just—they don’t know what
is going to happen.
Our maple syrup makers, back and
forth. We get a lot of syrup from Canada and blend it and make it into products with Vermont syrup. Canada is
the biggest producer of the second best
maple syrup in the world. Vermont is
the biggest producer of the best maple
syrup in the world—in the United
States. But the equipment that our
sugar makers use is largely manufactured in Canada. A 25-percent tariff on
that, that is going to hammer the
Vermont maple producers. Again, they
operate on a small margin.
A lot of these farms, as you know,
and the sugar producers—or, we have
got a family company up there, a second generation, that makes high-quality furniture—these are family businesses, and they have tight margins.
They are competing. They are really
working hard. The Northeast Kingdom
is really a pretty low-income part of
Vermont, with wonderful, incredibly
hard-working people who are very
proud of where they live and who they
are and who their neighbors are.
They are asking really tough questions about how they can make it and
whether they can stay in business. And
this is not the same as immigration,
but there is an element here that is the
same as immigration.
Shouldn’t any policy that we pursue
start with the premise that we will do
no harm? So it might be a policy the
Presiding Officer is advocating. And I
know when the Presiding Officer served
in your previous job, you would be
wanting to make certain that what you
did, did no harm. In fact, you would be
insisting that it did some good.
And my question with the tariffs is
whether the administration is starting
out from the premise that I think all of
us should start with: Yeah, we may
have an idea. We hope it might work.
But we have to make sure it does no
harm.
Mr. BOOKER. I was going to ask a
question. Did the Senator finish his
question?
Mr. WELCH. That is a long question,
and I am waiting for a long answer.
Mr. BOOKER. I want to first start by
saying that the Senator has a reputation around this place; that there is a
deep, penetrating goodness that is in
you. I love to watch my Senate colleagues when other people are not—it
is a habit of mine—because I think
what you do when no one is watching is
really telling. There is a belief I have
that someone who is nice to you but
not nice to the waiter is not a nice person.
And we have a body full of people
that show some deep, decent goodness.
You are one of those people. And what
I love about watching you is that it
could be the farthest ideological person
away from you, and you just have
this—like, you look at people like you
see their divinity, whether it is the
person at the highest position, a leader
of the Senate on either side, or someone who holds the door.
What I love about you is, when I
watch you, you are one of the Senators—some people just keep to their
side of the aisle—I always look up, and
I find you over there talking to somebody. And I just rely on that decency
in you as a friend, and I have come to
love you like a brother, and I want to
thank you for being here before your
alarm in the morning goes off. It really
touches me.
And I don’t know if you remember
this, but about 12 hours ago, you sat
right here and you embraced me in a
hug, and I leaned on that hug because
I wasn’t sure that I would even make it
12 hours. I take strength from you, my
friend. And I take strength from you to
hold to my kindness, to look for it everywhere.
This is a story I don’t think I have
ever shared with you, but it speaks to
how we get things done and how we
should get things done.
When I first got to the U.S. Senate,
my mentor, Bill Bradley, gave me
three real lessons for me to learn. I
think I have obeyed two out of the
three. One was to know the rules of
procedure really well. That is the one I
have probably failed. I am still learning things, 13 years into this, about the
rules of procedure. The second one was
become a specialist in some areas;
don’t be a mile wide and an inch deep.
I feel like I have done a pretty good job
on that.
But the one that he told me that was
most fruitful—I already mentioned one
of the benefits I had in doing this with
John McCain earlier in this 12 hours—
he commanded me to go and meet with
all your Republican colleagues; take
them out to dinner, sit with them for
lunch, whomever they are.
I went out to dinner with TED CRUZ.
It was hard—to find a restaurant—because I am a vegan and TED CRUZ is
from Texas. But I still remember that
we went out and how people were sort
of shocked just to see two human
beings breaking bread.
But the story I want to tell my friend
about is when I went to see Jim Inhofe,
a Republican from the same State as
Lankford. And I couldn’t get him to
meet with me. I couldn’t get on his
schedule.
And I found out that he had Bible
study in his hideaway, and so I go up to
his hideaway for Bible study. THUNE
was there. And we all have implicit biases. We all have implicit biases. My
implicit bias was that I did not expect
of this older, conservative man that I
would walk in and see on his mantle
this beautiful picture, centered, of him
hugging a little Black girl. I am embarrassed by that, that it so surprised
me.
And I—especially in those days, I
didn’t talk to, like, the senior giants in
the Senate. I didn’t call them by their
first names. I still have a problem calling Senator DURBIN by his first name,
for example. He is a lion of the Senate,
in my opinion, and one of the kindest
people to me since I have been here.
So I go to him—I go to Jim Inhofe. I
go, ‘‘Mr. Chairman, sir,’’ and I look at
the picture and I go, ‘‘Who dat?’’
And he smiles and chuckles, and then
he tells me the most beautiful story of
his family adopting this little Black
girl out of some of the most terrible
circumstances. And I was so moved.
And thinking about my friend Bill
Bradley, I would have never known this
incredibly beautiful thing about someone who is my—ideologically, we disagreed on so many things, but knowing
this personal moment, it created this
thread between us—not a rope, not a
cord, but a thread—that connected me
to him, and it created a deeper affection.
So fast-forward many months in this
body, and there is a big education bill,
which CHRIS MURPHY referenced earlier. A big education bill was going
through the Senate because No Child
Left Behind—we were going back the
other way. Senator DURBIN has told me
about this pendulum that sometimes
swings and swings back in its place.
And it was a deal.
Lamar Alexander was in the well of
the Senate. He was the manager of the
bill. And there were no amendments allowed. No amendments allowed. Of
course, I am sitting back here. This is
where I sat. And you talk about egos.
My ego—I had this great amendment,
and I was frustrated that they were
having this rule—no amendments—but
I have a great amendment to do something about homeless and foster children, who have the worst educational
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.125 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2004 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
outcomes, and I thought I had a modest amendment to try to make a difference for American children who are
in foster care or that were homeless.
And I am frustrated. I am sitting
back here, something that I dream of
doing again one day—sitting—and just
kind of upset. And then I see, walking
through those doors, Senator Jim
Inhofe, and he walks to the well kind of
talking. And I remember the story he
told me about this little Black girl in
his family, and something tells me to
get up. And I walk into the well, down
these steps, and I say to him, ‘‘Mr.
Chairman, sir, I know how much you
care for children in tough circumstances. I have an amendment.’’
And I explained my amendment to
him, and he looked at me and gave me
the Senate version of no, which is, ‘‘I
will think about it.’’
And I got frustrated, and I said,
‘‘Thank you, sir, for considering it,’’
and I walked back and I sat down right
here. And then when I picked my head
up, he is marching into our side—like
you do on the other side—like his GPS
coordinates were off. He marches up to
me and just sort of grunts at me, ‘‘I’m
in,’’ and then turns around and starts
walking away from me.
I step up and I say, ‘‘Wait. Excuse
me. What do you mean?’’
He goes, ‘‘CORY, I am going to cosponsor your amendment.’’ And I was
so happy.
And now I go over to Senator GRASSLEY and say the same thing to him—a
relationship that, thanks to DICK DURBIN, I really bonded; I have a sweet relationship with him even though,
again, we disagree on so much. He
doesn’t even make me wait. He looks
at me, and he goes, ‘‘You got Inhofe?’’
And he signs on my amendment.
(Mr. YOUNG assumed the Chair.)
By the time I go to Lamar Alexander,
I look up and I am like, I got a full
house. Sorry, I got no other Democrats,
but I got all these Republicans. He
looks at me, and he laughs. He goes
‘‘Really?’’ and he puts the amendment
on the bill. It is the law of the land
right now.
So what you said in the beginning of
your long windup question, my dear
friend, my dear brother, is how real
change is made.
That man, DICK DURBIN, when I first
got to the Senate, he knew how much
I cared about criminal justice reform.
He brought me to the table. I started
working—as I presided, I started working in conversations with MIKE LEE, in
conversations with CHUCK GRASSLEY.
We cobbled together a bill. It wasn’t
done by Executive fiat; it was done in
the Senate—87 votes. It is the law of
the land. Thousands have been liberated from unjust incarceration.
So my point to the Senator is that
his spirit is so right, is so true about
what it takes to make real change, but
the President we have right now
doesn’t seem to be coming to this body
with any kind of bold, bipartisan legislation to solve the problems of our Nation, to cobble together the common
ground of this country on immigration.
No. He is not acting like that. He is
using language like ‘‘Presidential primacy.’’ He is defending his corrupt
practices in immigration by saying
things like ‘‘Presidential primacy.’’ He
is invoking the Alien Enemies Act. He
is invoking the Alien Enemies Act—an
act from the 1700s—to deny due process, and Antonin Scalia, a textualist,
said that whether you are born in this
country or not, you have due process
here.
The Constitution states only one
thing twice: Both the 5th and the 14th
Amendments say that no one—not no
citizen—no one shall be deprived of liberty or property without due process of
law. Yet this President is disappearing
people and, as we documented here, disappearing the wrong people; as we documented here, unjustly detaining
Americans, separating families—all
while pushing his agenda and doing
things that the values of people on
both sides of this aisle don’t believe in,
like stopping the investigation of children for alleged sexual molestation.
This is wrong.
I sat down with some of the advocates who were telling me and who are
trying to fight to stop the law from
being broken, and they scared me, DICK
DURBIN, because they said what I said
on this floor: If someone is willing to
violate the Constitution for some, it
endangers the constitutional rights for
us all. Do not think this is, oh, those
people. If they are violating the rights
of some, it is a threat to the rights of
all.
I am standing here because of a national crisis that is growing. We talked
about Social Security. We talked about
healthcare. We talked education. This
is a crisis for us.
This is what the person said. They
talked about the Insurrection Act.
They have been hearing people in the
administration talk about the Insurrection Act.
Every person in this Congress and
across this country wants a safe and secure border, but scapegoating immigrants to erode basic constitutional
freedoms does not make America safer,
does not make our communities safer,
does not reform our immigration system like we should be doing in a bipartisan manner like LANKFORD and MURPHY. It does not stop our longstanding
problems in our agricultural industry
and our tech industry.
History has shown that when due
process and basic constitutional rights
are eroded for some people, it does not
stop. It continues to erode. The shoreline that kept you safe will shrink
until it reaches you.
I am reminded of German Pastor
Martin Niemoller’s quote about fascism in Germany:
First they came for the socialists, and I did
not speak out—because I was not a socialist.
Then they came for the trade unionists,
and I did not speak out—because I was not a
trade unionist.
Then they came for the Jews, and I did not
speak out—because I was not a Jew.
Then they came for me—and there was no
one left to speak for me.
Well, everything that has happened
in the last few months contradicts
American values, shared values. I am
most concerned about what this signals
for the future and the potential indication of this President of the Insurrection Act.
Some of our country’s most prominent lawyers have warned that the invocation of these two antiquated
laws—the Alien Enemies Act and the
Insurrection Act—may result in the
true erosion of our constitutional
rights.
Trump’s recent indication of the
Alien Enemies Act is the first step to
securing people without due process,
which Justice Scalia said is wrong, and
then on the first day in office, Trump
directed the Secretary of Defense and
the Secretary of Homeland Security—
Trump directed them to initiate a 90-
day review to determine whether the
President should invoke the Insurrection Act of 1807. That 90-review—when
do the 90 days come up, folks? This
month. In 19 days. April 20.
The President of the United States
has already invoked a 1780-something
law and also asked his immigration
folks, his homeland security folks, to
do a 90-day review about the Insurrection Act of 1807.
Now, there are probably people
watching and saying: What is the Insurrection Act? I had to look up what
the Alien Enemies Act was. So let me
tell folks what the Insurrection Act
that our President on his first day in
office—of all the things a President has
to do, he turned to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Homeland
Security to initiate a 90-day review of
the Insurrection Act.
America, what is the Insurrection
Act of 1807? It is among the President’s
most powerful authorities. He can deploy the U.S. Armed Forces and militia
during a national emergency. He can
declare a national emergency.
This President has already wrongfully declared national emergencies. He
declared a national emergency on energy. Senator KAINE talked about the
outrageousness of somebody declaring
a national emergency on energy when
we are at the highest level of petrol
chemical extraction in our country’s
history. Until he started rolling back
what we were doing on wind and solar,
we had an all-of-the-above strategy.
Nobody ‘‘drill baby drilled’’ more than
Joe Biden.
The Insurrection Act gives the ability of the President to declare a national emergency to suppress insurrections, to quell civil unrest or domestic
violence, and to enforce the law when
he believes it is being obstructed.
When can the President invoke the
Insurrection Act? Well, nothing in the
text of the law defines insurrection, rebellion, or domestic violence. Those
are prerequisites for deployment, but
they don’t define those things.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.126 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2005
One of Trump’s first Executive orders
signed the evening he took office on
January 20 was titled ‘‘Declaring a National Emergency at the Southern Border of the United States.’’ In that
order, he said ‘‘America’s sovereignty
is under attack.’’ He has already declared a national emergency.
Neither Congress nor the courts
played a role in deciding what constitutes an obstruction or a rebellion.
If Trump does unlawfully invoke the
Insurrection Act, he can conceivably
use our military to carry out his deportation agenda within our country’s
borders, all without any due process or
opportunity to prove that their presence in the U.S. is lawful or even that
they are a citizen.
Trump himself said he wants to deport American citizens to foreign countries. Trump himself has said: I want
to deport American citizens to foreign
countries.
On February 4, he said:
I am just saying if we had a legal right to
do it, I would do it in a heartbeat. I don’t
know if we do or not. We are looking at it
right now.
This is what he has asked his Secretary of Defense and his Secretary of
Homeland Security to say: Can I invoke the Insurrection Act?
So don’t be mistaken. This is not just
about immigrants. This is not just denying immigrants the due process that
Antonin Scalia said that immigrants
have a right to so you don’t disappear
the wrong people like the Trump administration has done, that you don’t
wildly disagree with what a citizen is
saying and use that as a pretext to disappear them.
He is creating the pretext to invoke
that 1807 law, the Insurrection Act, and
if he does that, when they came for the
immigrants and denied them due process, he is trying to get us to surrender
our commitment to the constitutional
guarantees that Americans have. He
has said he would invoke—he would deport Americans if he could.
When the President denies due process to some in America, it threatens
the due process of all.
Let’s see what happens on April 20 if
this President, who has already invoked the Alien Enemies Act, follows
through and invokes the Insurrection
Act. But why wait until April 20? Raise
your voice now. Stand up now. Do
something now. Cause some good trouble now. Let this President know that
if he does ever do that, there will be a
rising up of people’s voices, a rising up
of good trouble, as John Lewis would
say, to say: Not in my country. This is
unacceptable.
Mr. DURBIN. Will the Senator yield
for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. To Senator DICK DURBIN, to somebody who has been my
mentor and friend, I will yield for a
question while retaining the floor.
Mr. DURBIN. Thank you. I first want
to acknowledge this extraordinary moment in the history of the Senate. I believe you have been holding the floor
now for more than 10 hours, and perhaps we will go on even longer.
You have been joined by your colleague and friend Senator MURPHY of
Connecticut. I am sorry to take the
early morning shift, but I didn’t want
to miss this moment in history, not
just for the historic nature of it but for
the substance of it as well.
I just remind my colleague and fellow
member of the Senate Judiciary Committee that it was only maybe 3,
maybe 4 weeks ago that we had witnesses before the Judiciary Committee,
and I asked a question. One of them is
pending on the calendar, the Executive
Calendar, on the floor. His name is
Dean Sauer of Missouri. He is seeking
the position of Solicitor General of the
United States. Along with him was the
lady aspiring to be the Assistant Deputy Attorney General for Civil Rights,
Harmeet Dhillon, and Aaron Reitz, who
has been approved by the Senate for a
legal policy position.
The questioning went to the basics of
our Constitution, which you have
noted here today; that is, what is the
check and balance on a President?
What is the accountability of a President under the Constitution?
As I read it—and I don’t profess to be
expert; I am still learning—as I read it,
the accountability of the President is
in article II—in article III, I am sorry,
article III, the judiciary.
Ultimately, the President can be held
accountable by impeachment in Congress or by decision of the court. Some
of the orders that he is promulgating
are inconsistent with law and the Constitution.
The question that was asked of the
witnesses who are seeking positions in
the Department of Justice: Can a public official defy a court order? It seems
so fundamental and basic. The answer
is no, of course, but these three witnesses all equivocated in their own
ways, which raises a question: If this
President is not held accountable by
court order, what, then, can control a
President who misuses their office, to
the detriment of the Nation, of the people who live here? That, I thought, was
a fundamental question.
It was interesting to note—you may
remember—that one of our Republican
colleagues on the Senate Judiciary
Committee, Senator JOHN KENNEDY of
Louisiana, after hearing these witnesses equivocate on whether a public
official can defy a court order, came to
the committee and basically said:
What are you saying? The answer is obvious.
You can criticize a decision of the
court within the bounds of propriety as
a member of the bar. You can appeal a
decision of the court, but if that
doesn’t satisfy you, your recourse is to
quit, resign, leave. The Constitution
has the last word. The courts have the
last word. And I think that is a question that you are raising today.
Where is the accountability of the
President of the United States when he
misuses the power of office?
In the cases that you have mentioned, the Alien Enemies Act—it is a
law that has been around since 1807 or
somewhere around that time—I think
it is clear, unless you have declared a
war or unless you are invaded, you cannot invoke the Alien Enemies Act as
this President has done, and he is being
challenged in that regard.
Yesterday, our friend Senator GRASSLEY, who chairs the Judicial Committee—and I say ‘‘friend.’’ Some people back home say: Don’t say that anymore. We don’t talk to those people.
They are wrong. This is a body where
we do talk to one another, and we
should for good reason.
Well, he raised the question yesterday, why is President Trump being
challenged so often in court? Well, he
has issued 102 Executive orders. I don’t
know if that is a record, but I will bet
it is, 102 Executive orders. Questioning
something as basic as birthright sovereignty, birthright citizenship.
And so the point that I am getting to
is in obvious situations here where
President Trump has gone too far,
where is the accountability? It is not
going to be an impeachment. We are realists. We know that the Republican
House of Representatives is not likely
to ever consider that. It could be in the
courts.
And if it goes to the courts, the question is, Will this President follow a
court order if it goes against his policy? And if he won’t follow that court
order, where is the accountability?
Where is the check and balance? Where
is the constitutional framework which
is supposed to be at the foundation of
this democracy?
I think you are raising important
questions, and the Insurrection Act,
the use of our military for political
purposes, is a frightening prospect. It
is something we have avoided throughout our history and should continue to.
And I just commend you for raising
this point because I believe it is timely. It is timely as the questions that we
ask of these Department of Justice
nominees about the enforceability of
court orders.
And the question is now, Will the
American people speak up? I am counting on some of our Republican friends
to speak up too. Throughout history,
there have been moments when the
party, other than the President’s
party, showed extreme courage, political courage, and spoke up. We need
that kind of voice now. I thank you for
raising it on the floor this morning. My
question to you is, at this moment in
time, as we ask these nominees whether they would follow a court order or
defy a court order, doesn’t that get to
the basics of our constitutional democracy?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, yes, yes, it does. I
mean, you put forth this litany where
what we have to ask ourselves is at
what point do my colleagues in the
House and the Senate and the Republican Party say enough? Enough. God
bless JOHN KENNEDY for calling out the
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.127 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2006 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
absolute absurd. I was in that hearing
where you have nominees for some of
the highest positions in the administration failing to say that they will
abide by a court order.
I mean, that is something we haven’t
heard people on either side of nominees
just say so bluntly now, not, yes, I will
follow the orders of a court. They are
equivocating. And God bless one of my
colleagues, JOHN KENNEDY, who said:
That is absurd. You either obey the
order or you resign because we have a
Constitution.
And so when is it enough? When is it
enough? This is the week, this is the
month of Passover, and there is a wonderful song I love singing when I am at
a Pesach seder—the Dayenu. ‘‘It would
have been enough,’’ is the song, if God
just delivered us from Egypt. It would
have been enough if he parted the seas.
Dayenu. This is kind of a twisted
version of that. When is it enough
when the President of the United
States starts a meme coin on his first
day, violating the emoluments clause
immediately and enriching himself?
When is it enough when he takes an
Agency that is on the frontlines of
stopping infectious diseases, like Ebola
or drug-resistant tuberculosis, from
coming here? Is that enough? When we
created that in Congress, and he has no
right to stop that Agency, would that
have been enough?
When is it enough for him to issue
Executive orders that trample on the
highest ideals of this land, when he
mocks members of the courts so badly
that even the current Chief Justice admonishes him? When is it enough when
Elon Musk is indiscriminately firing
people and then realizing oops, we need
the FAA safety folks; oops, we need the
nuclear folks who are helping us keep
our regulations? When is it enough
that you will say: ‘‘OK. I will call them
in and have a hearing to create some
transparency in what he is doing’’?
When is it enough when he activates
the Alien Enemies Acts and starts disappearing human beings without due
process? When is it enough?
Well, it is enough for me. It is enough
for me. Twelve hours now I am standing, and I am still going strong because
this President is wrong. And he is violating principles that we hold dear and
principles in this document that are so
clear and plain. The powers of the article I branch are spelled out, and he is
violating them. Don’t take my word for
it, Republican-appointed judges, Democrat-appointed judges are saying it and
stopping him, and then he maligns the
judge that did that.
When is it enough for people to speak
out and not just fall in line, to put patriotism over a person that is in the
White House?
So to your question, sir, to my
friend, and I am sorry to get a little
animated at this early morning hour,
but I am so frustrated and not just because of that, but I am reading the stories.
We are going into the next section,
which is national security, and I am
reading the stories of our citizens of
this country, not just New Jerseyans,
there are a lot we have read in these 12
hours, but there are people from all
over the country who are reaching out
to my office.
And I know they are yours, Senator
DURBIN. You are the second highest
ranking Democrat in here. I know they
are reaching out to you because you
are a man that stands for justice. I
know they are reaching out to your office, too, because you are one of the
outposts for sanity in a Congress that
is being too complicit to an Executive
that is overstepping his authority and
violating the Constitution and hurting
people who rely on healthcare and Social Security.
I am reading these stories, sir, because of the voices of the Americans
that don’t have the privilege of the 100
of us, who don’t get to stand here, but
I believe the power of the people is
greater than the people in power.
Those are the ideals of our democracy
and our Constitution.
So I am rip-roaring and ready. I am
wide awake. I am going to stand here
for as many hours as I can, 12 hours,
and I recognize that my other friend,
another person I consider more than a
friend, like a sister to me, from the
State of New York, my neighbor.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. Senator BOOKER,
would you yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. My sister, for you I
will yield for a question while retaining the floor.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. Senator BOOKER,
I have been listening to this debate all
night, and I have got to say, you are on
fire. And you are on fire because the
American people are very, very angry
about what is happening. They are not
happy with what this administration
has done. It is contrary to what was
promised. It is contrary to what was
expected.
And I know we are going to talk
about national security in a few minutes, but can I ask a question about
one of the topics you talked about last
night? Because it was exactly what my
constituents were talking to me about
yesterday.
So I was in New York yesterday, and
we talked about these cuts to Social
Security. I have to say, I was stopped
by a gentleman who worked at Amtrak
and said: Madam Senator, Madam Senator, I just want to thank you for protecting my Social Security. That has
never happened to me before. Never
happened at Amtrak to be stopped by
someone who worked there to thank
me for one thing I had done that day.
But I am telling you, Senator BOOKER, when Elon Musk starts firing people in Social Security and tells the Social Security Administration, ‘‘You
cannot answer the phone,’’ what are
our mothers and fathers and grandmothers and grandfathers supposed to
do? Many of them are not readily available to be on a computer. Many of
them can’t ask their question online.
And, worse, Elon Musk is expecting
them to show up in person at a Social
Security office.
How many of our older Americans
are not able to drive anymore or are
uncomfortable driving? How many of
our older Americans feel uncomfortable getting in the subway to get to a
Social Security Administration because there are stairs or because the
lighting is not good enough?
These are the challenges that our
older Americans have, and so I just
want to talk about the things you told
us last night about the risk to Social
Security.
Social Security is our seniors’
money. It is not the government’s
money. It is their money. So what happens when you make it hard for a senior to call and make sure their check is
on the way or their check never showed
up, and they can’t find it?
For a lot of older Americans, that
Social Security check is the only
money they have for that month. It
pays for food, right? It pays for heating
bills. It pays for their medicine. It pays
for the rent. It pays for everything
they need to survive. And Elon Musk’s
office doesn’t believe anybody should
be answering the phones. Who is he to
tell America how to run its Social Security Administration when our seniors need those checks?
They have crippled the phone service,
even though—get this one—they can’t
answer the phone, crippled the phone
service. You can only make an appointment on the phone. So how are you
supposed to make an appointment if
you are going to go in? I mean, that is
absurd. They plan to cut 7,000 staff.
That is a lot of staff.
Mr. BOOKER. Seven thousand.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. Seven thousand
staff, even though the Social Security
Administration staffing is already at a
50-year low. So they are lying when
they are saying this is about efficiency.
They just want the money, and what do
they want the money for? Tax cuts for
billionaire buddies of Elon Musk. It is
an obscenity. It is an absurdity. It is an
outrage, and everyone in America
should be concerned. Hands off our Social Security, Elon Musk and President
Trump. Hands off.
They are rallying all across the country to say: Hands off my Social Security, hands off my Medicare, hands off
my Medicaid.
It is an outrage. And I don’t think
people should stand for it because your
Social Security check is your hardearned money. It is not for Elon Musk
to play with, to shift around, or send it
to tax breaks for his billionaire friends.
Now, I have to say, my office has
been working closely with one senior.
Now, she is a New Yorker with a disability, and she was told that she had
to call a specific representative’s extension by the end of March. Well, that
was yesterday. And if she didn’t get
this person, her application could be
denied.
She has called every day, sometimes
more than once a day. She has been on
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.129 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2007
hold for 4 to 5 hours just to reach this
representative. As of yesterday when
we reached out to her, she had still not
reached the representative.
So Americans across the country are
panicked. They are stressed. They are
worried that they won’t get their hardearned money back, their retirement,
to pay for the things that they need.
Now, this is the money they spent
their entire careers paying into. You
know, every time you get a paycheck,
Senator BOOKER, there is a line that
says Social Security because that
money has been taken out of your paycheck and put into Social Security so
it is there for you when you retire. It is
your retirement. The pages sitting here
right here, you are paying into your
Social Security.
Now, imagine, this is your first paycheck, isn’t it? I bet it is your first
paycheck. Your first paycheck, you are
putting in dollars that, you know, you
want saved so that when you—you
can’t even imagine what it is going to
be like to be 65. But the day you are
working here, the fact that you spent
all night here supporting Senator
BOOKER, that is your retirement.
Wouldn’t you be pissed off if Elon Musk
took your retirement money? You
should be. He doesn’t have any right to
it, and what he is doing is he is doing
it by cutting staff.
So if you need help because your Social Security didn’t arrive, then how
are you supposed to get that check?
They can’t issue you a new one unless
they know that it didn’t show up in the
mail like it is supposed to.
Ultimately, cutting individuals from
Social Security doesn’t just affect
them; it affects the entire economy. So
you can imagine if all our seniors are
getting this Social Security benefit,
you can’t go then buy your groceries.
You are not going to be able to then go
buy whatever you need for your home.
Those stores will get less money, and
that means there will be less resources
in the economy.
Social Security, if you didn’t know
it, is our country’s largest anti-poverty
program. It keeps people out poverty.
That is what it does. When we designed
Social Security, however many decades
ago, it was so that our seniors don’t die
in poverty, because they were dying.
About half of seniors, at that time,
were dying in poverty. They didn’t
have enough food to live.
And so we created Social Security. It
is one of the most popular programs. It
is one of the most respected programs.
So reducing access to this key program, Senator BOOKER, is an outrage.
It is harmful. It is cruel. It is hurtful.
So I know that this is something that
you have really spent a lot of time on
last night, but don’t you think it is
cruel to not allow phone service? Don’t
you think it is wrong to make it harder
for people to get access to their hardearned money? Don’t you think this is
something that America did not sign
up for in this election?
Mr. BOOKER. I read last night—
thank you for the question, my friend.
I read last night some of the most painful letters of people over and over
again, from throughout my State and
throughout other States, who are living in fear, who use words like ‘‘terrified’’ and told stories that they
couldn’t sleep because of the rhetoric
of this President, the rhetoric of Elon
Musk calling it a Ponzi scheme, telling
lies during the joint address.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. Yes.
Mr. BOOKER. And then I read stories
from people that work in Social Security. They are telling about not having
desks and the waiting lines and inefficiencies that this has created, and the
horrible, deteriorating customer service.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. Yes.
Mr. BOOKER. And I have been trying, as much as I can, during these last
12 hours, to read stories of Republicans.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. Yes, this affects
everyone.
Mr. BOOKER. To read editorials from
the Wall Street Journal, to just show
that this isn’t a partisan thing. This
isn’t about left or right. It is about
right or wrong. It is about will we, as
a country, honor our commitments
that we made.
And then I read from independent
folks that are saying: This is crazy
that this program is even in jeopardy.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. I have another
question for you because I know you
want to move on to some national security issues this morning.
Mr. BOOKER. And I will yield for a
question while retaining the floor.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. Thank you, Senator BOOKER.
So the other thing that stressed out
my constituents that I talked about
this weekend is air safety. They are
very, very stressed out about these
cuts to the FAA.
You know, there was a plane crash
not too far from here—a helicopter
crash. Everyone in that helicopter perished.
We have been reading about stories
across the country about flight safety
and the fact that there are near collisions all the time.
We had a horrible crash in New York,
in Buffalo, the Colgan Air crash. I have
gotten to know the families over the
last several years because they have
worked together for legislation to
make sure that we have pilot safety.
But what I have been watching in
terms of this administration is they
don’t seem to care. They just have
made up this idea that cuts across the
board are necessary to get rid of fraud
and waste in the budget.
And I agree we can make government
more efficient, but the way you do that
is at least learn what each of these
Agencies does, study what is happening
in them and how to make them more
efficient. Make sure the right number
of personnel are hired. Make sure the
right training is offered. Make sure
there are no wasteful programs. That is
good government.
That is not what Elon Musk and his
DOGE boys are doing. That is nothing
like what they are doing. They are just
cutting everything because they want
to make space for these tax cuts for
their billionaire buddies.
It is really disgraceful. It is something that I don’t quite understand.
So over the past 2 months—just the
past 2 months—we have seen horrifying
accidents and near-misses at airports
all across the country, and there was
another close call just this past Friday,
again, at DCA. Many of these accidents
have been a result of chronic understaffing and antiquated technologies at
the FAA.
But instead of fixing those problems,
the first thing that the Trump administration did when it came to power
was fire people.
I think he is kind of stuck in the loop
of ‘‘The Apprentice″: You are fired. You
are fired. You are fired.
I don’t get it.
Good government is important, and I
support efficiency. That is not what
they are doing. It is like they are on a
power trip, and they just want to fire
everybody across the board—just fire
them all.
So while the court forced the FAA to
rehire workers—thank God for the
courts. Thank God for the judges that
are doing their jobs and looking at
these lawsuits appropriately. Many
Federal workers have simply moved on
and found new jobs because these are
highly skilled, highly sought-after employees, people that we really want
working in the Federal Government to
keep our country safe.
Now, just weeks after the horrific
plane crash here, with 67 people getting
killed in Washington, the administration fired hundreds of Federal Aviation
Administration employees, jeopardizing the public safety and threatening
our national security. So that made no
sense. It was right on the heels of some
horrific accident that we all witnessed.
Now, over 90 percent of U.S. airport
terminal towers don’t have enough air
traffic controllers. Critical shortages
remain for other aviation safety personnel, such as safety inspectors and
mechanics, to make sure that, when we
get on that plane, that plane is ready
to go.
In New York, nearly 40 percent of positions are unfilled at two facilities on
Long Island that direct air traffic for
Newark, our shared airport, JFK, and
LaGuardia. As a result, over these past
few years, the United States has experienced a substantial and alarming increase in the number of near-misses.
According to an analysis in the New
York Times, in 2023, close calls involving commercial airlines occurred, on
average, multiple times each week, and
the number of significant air traffic
control lapses increased 65 percent over
the previous year.
What did they cite as the major reason behind the increase? A shortage of
air traffic controllers.
While the Trump administration
claims no air traffic controllers or critical safety personnel were fired, we
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.130 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2008 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
know that many of those who were let
go played essential roles in maintaining our air traffic control infrastructure. Others were responsible for maintaining navigational, landing, and
radar systems.
We also know that safety inspectors,
systems specialists, and maintenance
mechanics are among the workers who
were affected. And at least one of the
employees fired worked for FAA’s National Defense Program, which protects our air space from enemy drones,
missiles, and aircraft used as weapons.
I want to talk about those missiles
and drones as well. I really want to
talk to you about what your thinking
is here that we don’t have a plan. You
have the incursions in New Jersey and
incursions in New York at the same
time, and we don’t have assurance that
those drones aren’t being operated by
China or Russia or Iran or another adversary for a nefarious purpose. We
have to get to the bottom of this, and
that is something that, Senator BOOKER, you and I have been at the forefront when questioning the administration about what they are doing on this
issue.
So the question I have is this: Why
did the administration fire these workers and so easily part with them? Who
will perform these duties going forward? What risk analysis was performed to ensure this won’t make flying less safe?
Now, I asked these questions of the
Secretary of Transportation in a letter
on February 20, over a month ago. And
what was their response? We don’t
know. They haven’t answered my letter. They are not willing to engage the
Senate in actual policy and decisions
that keep our State safe.
What is worse is that we don’t know
if this is where it ends or if more reductions are coming and more reductions
that allow for safety for our FAA.
Now, DOGE’s so-called workforce optimization initiative—it is BS. They
don’t do the analysis first. They just
make the cuts.
We need the Secretary and the Acting FAA Administrator to respond to
Congress’s questions and oversight.
The American people deserve to have a
Federal Aviation Agency that is dedicated to actually doing the job of protecting us, protecting this country.
The Trump administration needs to
take immediate steps to address FAA
staffing shortages across the entire
Agency, not just air traffic controllers.
So, Senator BOOKER, the question I
really want to ask you is this: For your
State, for New Jerseyans, what are
they thinking? How do they receive
this information? What do they say
when they read about drone incursions
over one of your arsenals, over one of
your sensitive military bases? What do
they think about cutting staff at the
FAA when they watch all this information about crashes?
I know my constituents are pretty
stressed out about it. They don’t understand why someone is making these
cuts.
Again, the ‘‘why’’ is the most important question. It is not for efficiency.
It is not to get rid of the fat. It is not
to get rid of the fraud. Never heard an
allegation that there is fraud in the
FAA. Never heard an allegation that
there is fat in the FAA. They have been
understaffed forever. So they are lying
about the purpose.
So what is the purpose? What is the
purpose? What are they going to do
with that money, Senator BOOKER? I
would like to know.
Mr. BOOKER. So I appreciate this
more than you know, and there is a
line threaded throughout your entire
question about the way they are going
about doing this from so many Agencies. First, they are trying to kill certain Agencies—the Department of Education, which they can’t legally do.
USAID, they can’t legally do. We created that—the article I branch of government.
But on some of these other Agencies
like Social Security, where you started, we know it is: Ready, fire, aim. And
actually the ‘‘aim’’ part never happens.
They are savagely cutting personnel
and organization after organization.
Seniors, thousands of them, are already writing in about the undermining of service. The Wall Street
Journal article we read last night said
that the customer service at Social Security is going from bad to worse and
painted horrific pictures that are putting seniors in crisis, not to mention
the closing of Social Security centers
in rural areas, where people have to
now drive hours and hours and hours.
And so at the FAA, it was one of the
early outrages that they fired people
that they then realized they needed
and tried to find some way to pull some
of them back.
And you and I both know the way
they talk about government workers—
a large percentage of them are veterans—the way they demean and degrade them, the way they accuse them
of being parts of corruption, fraud, or
fat, when the stories we have been
reading of what some of these folks do
is extraordinary.
And so your question, though, brings
up a lot of national security issues, and
I am going to bridge to that because
you and I both were really, really incensed that we weren’t getting enough
information when we had these incursions. And I want to start—what I have
been doing in other sections is just
reading, elevating on this floor the
voices of people from our country, trying to elevate more of the voices to let
people know we see you, we hear you.
Your outrage, your hurt, your fears—
they have value.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. I have another
question before you start your letters,
Senator BOOKER, if you will take another question, if you will yield.
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield for a question while retaining the floor.
Mrs. GILLIBRAND. So because you
are going into the national security
section, I want to give you a couple of
questions to pepper your answers because I sit on the Special Committee
on Intelligence in the Senate. I also sit
on the Armed Services Committee. And
so national security is an area where
New Yorkers care a deep amount
about, and I have been spending the
last 15 years focused on how we keep
this country safe and what we should
be doing. And so I get a lot of questions
from New Yorkers about this issue.
So I want you to address the drone
issue, for sure, because that is something you and I have been working on
continuously since we have seen these
incursions.
And just to give a little more context
for New Yorkers who might be listening to this debate, we have had drone
incursions over sensitive military sites
for quite some time now, and it is
something that I have been working on
on a bipartisan basis through the Intelligence Committee. Some of these incursions are every night, over and over
again, over sensitive military bases.
There was one over Langley. We have
had them over arsenals in New Jersey,
over sensitive sites in New York. We
have had them over military bases
across the country.
And, you know, I don’t like it when
the answer is, ‘‘Oh, we know where
most of this is. This is mostly FAA
traffic.’’ I don’t like it when I hear it
from this administration—or any administration—because it is not true.
Some of the drone sightings are planes
in the air, helicopters, you know,
maybe weather balloons, maybe enthusiasts, but they do not know if all are.
And with these specific incursions,
they do not know the origin of them.
They do not know whose they are.
They do not know who is operating
them. They do not know the purpose of
these drones. These drones could easily
be spying. They could be planning attacks. They could be doing anything
nefarious. We have no basis to say it is
all known, and we are not concerned.
So this is something we are going to
get to the bottom of. I am very incensed about it. It does not leave our
personnel safe. It does not leave our secrets safe. So drones is one issue.
The second issue, if you could address
it, is on the national security side:
cyber security. I think that—and election security.
One of the cuts that the DOGE boys
made—which I literally cannot understand why they would ever do this.
This is making us weaker. It is making
us less safe. It is not good for America.
It shows how ill-advised this process is
and how uninformed this process is and
how we can see through these cuts and
how insincere this process is. This is
not about waste. This is not about
fraud. This is not about good government. This is about making massive
cuts for tax breaks for billionaires because that is where they want to spend
your tax dollars—New Yorkers’ tax
dollars and New Jerseyans’ tax dollars.
They want to take it and give it as tax
breaks to billionaires.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.132 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2009
OK. So this is the question. They
have cut all of the personnel—or the
main personnel—at an organization
called CISA that we are supposed to be
doing election security with. So the
people who actually were working with
the States to make sure our election
system can’t be hacked—they fired
those people. They fired the senior personnel at the Department of Defense,
our most experienced generals across
the board, members from the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. They just fired them.
For what reason? I don’t know. No substantive reason was ever given, but
these are the senior personnel who actually keep us from wars, who have the
judgment and the experience to advise
the President, to advise Congress, to
advise us on how to keep us safe.
Then the last group they cut were
the lawyers. Do you remember that
Shakespeare play: The first thing we
do is kill all the lawyers? Well, the
context in which that was given was in
order to have a coup. So Shakespeare,
hundreds of years ago, said: If you want
to have a coup, the first thing you do is
you kill all the lawyers. Well, they
fired all the lawyers—the senior lawyers—of the Department of Defense.
They fired the generals who actually
know how to keep us safe, and then
they fired the personnel at CISA, who
are responsible for election interference. They fired the people at the
FBI, who were also responsible for election interference. So, again, these
firings make no sense. I don’t think
they are making us less—I don’t think
they are making us more safe. I think
they are making us less safe. When you
fire the people who know what they are
doing and are dedicated to keeping us
safe, it doesn’t make us safer.
What do you think, Senator BOOKER,
about any of the topics that I raised,
specifically on the drones, the firings
of the election protection personnel at
CISA, the firings of the generals, the
firings of the senior lawyers at the Department of Defense, or the firings of
the FBI personnel, who are also expert
at election interference? These are the
smartest, most capable, the most sophisticated, senior personnel who are
there to help us keep this country safe.
I really want to hear what you are
hearing from your State and what you
are thinking about this reckless, reckless approach to national security.
Mr. BOOKER. I am so grateful for the
questions from my colleague and my
friend.
I want folks to know, probably the
best dinner I had here when I came
here was with the Senator from New
York, who really gave me a quick rundown on how to get things done in this
body. I have watched her work on both
sides of the aisle, relentlessly, to get
things over the finish line and to help
people in our region—from the 9/11
folks, who were our first responders, to
get their healthcare; to fight to support the military, to empower the military; but to fight against sexual assault in the military. She is one of
these phenomenal people.
A lot of the questions we are going to
get to, including that question that
was obviously painful about national
security, is like, hey, one of the strategies of Russia—and we know this—is to
attack the elections of other democracies, to try to sow discord, to try to
undermine the very voting process, and
the Trump administration pulled away
a lot of the people from the DOJ and
elsewhere when their sole purpose was
to fight against foreign election interference.
So how can we have a nation where
the President is in charge of national
security and is not doing things to address the issues that were in your questions?
I want to start by reading a couple of
constituent letters. I know we want to
step back and talk a little bit about
immigration, as my colleague and my
friend and my partner in leadership in
the Senate TINA SMITH is here, but I
want to get into some of these letters
because I said over 12 hours ago that
we were going to continue to elevate
the voices of people out there.
So this is coming from—I just want
to—from someone from New Jersey.
They are writing:
Dear Senator Booker, I am writing to express my deep concern regarding the current
state of our Nation and the lack of response
to the looming constitutional crisis. It is becoming increasingly difficult to ignore the
actions of a President who routinely lies and
makes outrageous proposals such as annexing Greenland, Mexico, and Panama or even
renaming the Gulf of Mexico. Those proposals not only undermine our international
standing but also disrespect the foundations
of our country.
Furthermore, I am alarmed by the growing
threat to press freedom. Recently, for example, the Associated Press was barred from
the White House press room simply for referring to the Gulf of Mexico rather than the
Gulf of America—a clear sign of the President’s disregard for free speech and a free
press’s role in holding power to account.
The President is actively trampling on the
Constitution and blatantly ignoring the rule
of law—
As Senator GILLIBRAND was saying:
He has taken steps to slash vital Federal
Agencies and disaster relief programs, undermining our Nation’s capacity to respond to
crises. His decision to appoint unqualified individuals to high positions for the purpose of
following his will is another example of how
our democratic systems are being systematically weakened.
Additionally, his reckless and irresponsible
approach to foreign policy is making the
world more dangerous. His insistence on
blaming Ukraine for Russia’s invasion and
ongoing war is not only historically inaccurate but also deeply damaging to our allies
and global stability. Even worse, his administration has entertained so-called peace settlements that exclude Ukraine from the
process entirely, effectively allowing Russia
to dictate terms without any Ukrainian
input. Such actions betray our commitments
to sovereignty and democracy and embolden
authoritarian regimes worldwide.
Domestically, his agenda is destructive.
His administration has pursued the withdrawal from the USAID, the gutting of critical global humanitarian and development
efforts that have long served U.S. interests
abroad.
At home, he is enabling tech billionaires
like Elon Musk to take a chain saw to government Agencies, arbitrarily dismantling
institutions that provide essential public
services. His attacks on the NIH and its
funding jeopardize critical medical research
and public health initiatives, undermining
scientific progress for purely ideological reasons.
Beyond these threats, his treatment of our
closest allies is both reckless and embarrassing. His taunting of Canada, whether
through inflammatory rhetoric or deliberate
policy snubs, weakens our diplomatic ties
and disregards the importance of maintaining strong relationships with our neighbors.
This petty, shortsighted approach to international regulations has isolated the United
States at a time when global cooperation is
more critical than ever.
My greatest frustration, however, is the
lack of action from our Representatives and
Governors. Too many are cowering in fear of
the President’s authoritarian tactics. I am
troubled by the absence of pushback. I am
troubled by the absence of pushback. I am
troubled by the absence of pushback. We are
witnessing the erosion of checks and balances, and the consequences could be dire.
I was heartened by Governor Janet Mills,
of Maine, standing up to the President’s orders. Unfortunately, his response was a
threat to her political future—further evidence of the intimidation tactics being employed.
I implore you, Senator Booker, to show
some moral courage and take meaningful action to stand up to this growing threat to
our democracy. Please let me know how you
are responding to the situation and what
steps you, Senator Booker, are taking to defend our Constitution and the rule of law.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward
to hearing from you soon.
I hope at this early morning hour, at
almost 8 o’clock, that maybe you are
listening, because I hear you; I see you;
and I am standing here because I am
part of letters like yours. This is not
normal. These are not normal times,
and we must begin to do as John Lewis
said: Get in good trouble. Get in necessary trouble.
I want to read from another constituent. I just want to see where this
person is from. I am not trying to violate the privacy, which my staff
doesn’t want me to do.
Mr. MURPHY. Chippewa Falls.
Mr. BOOKER. What’s that?
Mr. MURPHY. Chippewa Falls.
Mr. BOOKER. We know Wisconsin is
getting a lot of love here. I told my colleague I kept seeing folks from two
towns—one in your State and one in
the great Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but this person, alas, is from
Jersey.
I wrote to ask you to do all you can to resolve funding for the National Institutes of
Health and USAID. I work in information
technology at Princeton University, and I
have seen firsthand the destruction the termination of funds is causing to research and
education. We are losing the momentum of
research and causing a deep and lasting loss
of educational resources. The NIH and the
National Science Foundation provide funds
for basic research as well as applied topics.
The benefits of this research will be long
lasting, and the cost of disruption will be
very high.
Similarly, the disruption of USAID is tragic. My daughter works for an organization
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.133 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2010 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
working with USAID on climate mitigation
and adaptation. She has lost job security as
a result of the Trump administration’s actions. Work she has built on in Ethiopia,
Kenya, and elsewhere will be disrupted due
to lack of funding.
Thank you for your leadership as our Senator. I am proud to be represented by you as
well as our new Senator, Andy Kim.
The promise of our country is great, but we
must redefine our purpose and imagine a new
future. Your experience and knowledge will
be critical to our country’s success.
Let me go with two more and then
turn to my colleague. This is a short
one.
I am writing to express my concerns about
the chaos and lawlessness coming out of the
White House. USAID must be restored.
Please use powers to restore democracy to
the United States of America. This is not
what democracy looks like. Thank you.
Somebody from New Jersey.
And one more. One more. One more
voice.
As a parent of a USAID Foreign Service Officer recently in Ukraine and now
in Kenya, I am outraged and horrified
by the coup now being staged by Elon
Musk under the authority from the
President. To be called ‘‘criminal’’
after putting your life at risk in the
service of America’s interests is itself
to be a victim of criminal-like behavior.
I have seen the beautiful roads and railroads in Africa, built by the Chinese. In one
fell swoop, Trump has given that continent
to the Chinese and the Russians. He did the
same thing years ago by canceling participation in the Pacific free trade pact, forfeiting
our power and our good will, making China
the largest player in the region. I saw the
good will in the eyes of passersby from the
Philippines to Georgia to Tajikistan. Now I
hear it turn to hostility.
Think of sports fans in Canada, booing our
National Anthem. Think also of the infants
who will now die of AIDS because USAID’s
treatment program was abruptly stopped,
along with vaccinations programs and programs for stopping diseases such as Ebola,
monkey pox, hemorrhagic fever. These diseases will come home with even a 90-day
pause of workers in these programs. We will
lose jobs, and rent, and some never will return. Refrigeration of medicines will be at
risk. Clinics and offices will become unavailable. Humpty Dumpty will not be quickly
put back together again.
Some of what Trump wants to do will ultimately need approval of Congress. I urge you
to fight every one of his proposals and appointments. Slow the legislative process as
much as you can, please. I hope Trump will
lose his majority. Thank you for your attention.
I will be of service in any way possible to
right these wrongs.
I love when constituents don’t only
point out what is wrong but stand up
and say: I will be of service. Let me
know how I can help.
Your voice is helping tonight. Speaking to these issues is helping tonight.
I know my Senate colleague is here.
She has a question. I will yield while
retaining the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. CASSIDY). The Senator from Minnesota.
Ms. SMITH. Mr. President, thank
you, and thank you to my colleague
from New Jersey for yielding for a
question.
I want to just start by thanking my
colleague, who is one of my dearest
friends in the Senate, for using your
voice in such a powerful way over the
many, many hours that you have been
holding the Senate floor. I know you
well enough to know that you are not
doing this because of your belief in the
power of your voice; you are doing this
because of your belief in the power of
all of the voices that you have been
amplifying all through the night and
your belief of the importance of the
millions of Americans who are so
frightened and concerned and horrified
by what they see this administration is
doing and wanting to feel like there is
somebody here who is fighting for them
and who is listening to them.
The way in which you are reading
these letters today and all through the
night, Senator BOOKER, I think is a
tribute to your respect for all of those
Americans. So I am so grateful for
that.
I wanted to take a moment, if I
could, to ask you to yield for a question related to what you have been
talking about.
You know, I certainly agree with you
that these are not normal times in our
Nation. As elected officials, it is our
duty to speak up and to fight back
against the abuses and the overreach of
this administration and to raise up the
voices of our constituents who, as I
said, are both frightened and furious
about what is happening.
My question to you, Senator BOOKER,
is about some of the Trump administration’s recent actions regarding immigration. My question is in three
parts.
First, I think that we can all agree
that our current immigration system
in this country is broken. It is not
working well for anyone. It is not
working well for American businesses
that depend on a global talent pool. It
is not working well for families who
want to reunite with their loved ones.
It is not working well at all for those
who seek refuge from persecution and
believe in the promises that are carved
into the Statue of Liberty.
To my colleague, I ask these questions, and I think about the issues,
about the shortcomings of our immigration as the Senator from Minnesota,
where our meat processing sector relies
so much on immigrant labor, where the
University of Minnesota is a beacon for
international students studying
science and technology and agriculture, where the resorts in Minnesota
rely on folks from all over the country
to come and make them work as little
mom-and-pop, 12-cabin operations up
on lakes in northern Minnesota and the
manufacturers rely on, as I said, the
best and the brightest from all over the
world coming to serve in our State and
serving our economy.
I think we know, my colleague from
New Jersey, that there have been real
and serious bipartisan attempts at
comprehensive immigration reform debated in this body. While I might not
have agreed with everything in these
proposals—I suspect you might not
have as well—I think we both, I am
sure, strongly believe that immigration is an issue that merits real debate
and real policy solutions. Our colleague
who was here on the floor with us this
morning, Senator MURPHY from Connecticut, has worked so hard to find
real, bipartisan solutions.
I believe that comprehensive immigration reform needs to ensure our national security. It needs to provide a
fair and workable path for immigrants
who want to come and contribute to
the American dream, which is what
truly makes this country great.
But here is the rub: The Trump administration’s recent actions show
that they are not interested in serious
policy reforms that would make Americans safer or make our immigration
system work more efficiently and fairly. Instead, what I think we can see is
that this President has prioritized
using our immigration system as a tool
to restrict First Amendment freedoms,
to subvert due process, and to further
weaken America’s global standing with
our allies and our regional partners as
he seeks to emulate the authoritarian
regimes he so openly admires.
As just one example, in recent weeks,
we have seen a number of international
students targeted for arrest and deportation merely on the basis of their proPalestinian advocacy. These are young
people who played by all the rules.
They entered this country with permission in order to further their education
and have not been accused or charged
with any criminal activity.
Their views on the war in Gaza may
differ sharply from mine or others, but
I believe that the First Amendment
guarantees them the right to express
those views without facing punishment
or reprisal from our government.
Nonetheless, the Trump administration has admitted that they are doing
exactly that—seeking to punish lawfully present immigrants and in some
cases even green card holders because
of the political views they have expressed. The Secretary of State has invoked a rarely used section of statute
that allows him to unilaterally designate for removal any alien who may
cause ‘‘potentially serious adverse foreign policy consequences.’’
As if that is not enough, many of
these arrests have been carried out in a
manner that seems calculated to maximize fear and intimidation in immigrant and activist communities. Here
is an example for my colleague to respond to. I want to take the case of the
recent arrest of Rumeysa Ozturk, a
Turkish graduate student at Tufts University who was studying the relationship between child development and
our social media-saturated, globally
connected world. She is here on a valid
student visa, she is not accused of any
crime, and by all accounts, she is a
loved and valued member of the Tufts
community. Her only purported offense
was being one of four coauthors of an
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.134 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2011
op-ed in the student newspaper that
urged the administration of Tufts to
engage with students’ calls to divest
from businesses with ties to Israel and
the IDF. For that offense, her visa was
revoked with no notice, and she was arrested on the street and spirited more
than 1,500 miles away, which is likely a
violation of a judge’s order, to await
her probable deportation.
I am sure many of my colleagues, including my colleague from New Jersey,
have seen the video of her arrest, which
was captured by a neighbor’s security
camera. It is utterly chilling. She is
surrounded by officers in plainclothes,
with no visible insignia, no markings
at all on their clothing. She is handled
roughly. Her belongings are taken
away from her and her hands are cuffed
before being loaded into an unmarked
car.
It is no exaggeration that her arrest
looks like a kidnapping—one that you
might expect to see in Moscow rather
than the streets of Boston.
Of course, the terror of what she experienced is horrible to think about,
but I also think about the thousands
and thousands and thousands of other
students here with a student visa or,
you know, other lawful immigrants
who see this and think to themselves:
This could happen to me. This could be
something that happens to my roommate or my student or anybody.
It seems like such a breakdown in
the rule of law and the way our country should operate.
So I would like to ask my colleague:
Does this seem normal or appropriate,
for Federal law enforcement officers of
the United States to conduct routine
arrests in plainclothes, with unmarked
cars, and with this overwhelming show
of force for individuals who pose no obvious physical threat to those law enforcement?
Furthermore, is this not exactly the
sort of operations that you would order
if your goal is to intimidate and dissuade immigrant and activist communities from exercising their constitutional rights to free speech?
Does punishing people for their political speech seem consistent with American democratic values? I can’t believe
that we would think that it would be
consistent.
I wonder if my colleague from New
Jersey would like to respond in any
way to this.
Mr. BOOKER. I want to respond deeply. I, first, want to thank my colleague
for being here in the morning. She is
one of my colleagues that I confided in
when I told her it was enough for me,
I needed to do something different, and
she readily encouraged me to be here
on the floor for what is now about 13
hours. She has encouraged me. She has
encouraged my heart and is just one of
my dear friends. I am just so grateful
to see her this morning.
I want to say something before I
begin answering her question. In my
hometown where I grew up in Bergen
County, there is a family, the Alexanders, whose son Edan is an American
who is being held by Hamas. He is
being likely tortured and in trauma
and in pain. He is a U.S. citizen. He is
an American.
I had a friend with me just recently,
a man who was driving me around. I
have this ribbon that I often use that I
keep in my pocket. It reminds me of
him and my determination to bring
him home—bring him home. I want his
family to know that, as a State Senator, he is in my thoughts.
I also feel there are so many New
Jerseyans who are affected by this crisis, who lost family members in the region. We must bring peace.
Then my friend Senator SMITH asked
this question about—which is a real
test because when you disagree with
someone’s statements so much, but the
very nature of the First Amendment—
what makes this document so precious
is that it says that no matter how reprehensible your speech is, this document says you have the right to say it.
I remember the controversy over an
NFL player who kneeled. One of the
voices that sticks in my head is a
White guy from the military who just
said: I fought battles—I think it was
Afghanistan—and I am offended by his
taking a knee, but the very reason I
fought was so that he would have the
freedom to do it.
So I came back. I was there on October 7. I have very hurt, strong feelings
about what is going on over there and
urgent desires to end the nightmare, to
bring people like Edan home, to end
the nightmare for so many Israelis and
Palestinians. I find so many things
people are saying so unhelpful to the
crisis and to the moral truth that I believe in. But I will fight for people’s
rights.
So here is a situation where you see
a video, and it just doesn’t seem like
who we are. If you are revoking somebody’s visa, make a phone call. Tell
them: You have 30 days to leave. But
there should be due process. You
should have to prove your claims in
court. If this person is somehow aligning with some kind of enemy, prove it.
But what I saw there doesn’t reflect
the highest ideals.
God, if this Constitution was easy, it
wouldn’t be worth the paper it is written on.
So I love my friend because she
wades into some difficult waters, but
she is guided by the oath that she took
to defend the Constitution, and in
these complex and difficult times, she
is standing up.
And I tell you, when we were in the
immigration section last night—or earlier, I should say—we read the most
painful stories. My brother over on the
other side of me—I have got some of
my really dear friends on the floor
right now: Senator MURPHY, Senator
WARNOCK, Senator SMITH.
My brother Senator WARNOCK knows
that we are a nation that is paying
hundreds of millions of dollars over the
years of the Trump administration to
fund private prisons that are being
paid, incentivized, to take away people’s liberties. We read stories in the
immigration section about people that
got trapped in those systems that
should never be there—horrible stories,
painful voices I have read, about folks
who were caught up in a system.
And I just loved that one article from
the Canadian who was, for weeks, put
in a private prison. And suddenly, when
she heard the lies of the people who
found ways to keep her there—the
‘‘aha’’ moment that she realized: These
people, every day I am there, they get
profit. They are not incentivized by
justice; they are incentivized by profit.
I read stories, Senator SMITH, of people who were sent to that horrible jail
in El Salvador that the government admitted they made a mistake. They disappeared someone who has American
family members. Story after story I
read that just are such a betrayal not
of democratic values but of American
values because we all in this body
know we need to do more to protect
our borders, to keep us safe, to arrest
criminals, be they undocumented or
documented. That is an urgency we all
feel.
But when you sacrifice your core values, when you sacrifice them to a
demagogue who says, ‘‘This is all about
your safety,’’ when you sacrifice your
core principles for your safety, you will
achieve neither. You will neither be
safe nor morally strong.
The true leaders on both sides of the
aisle that I have heard over the years
talk on these issues say we can do
both; we can make our country safe,
and we can abide by our values. And in
a complex world where country after
country disappears people, when authoritarian countries disappear their
political enemies, their political adversaries, disappear people who say things
they politically disagree with—those
countries are looking to us.
Did you know, when Donald Trump
started using that phrase ‘‘fake news,
fake news, fake news,’’ that in Turkey,
Erdogan started arresting people on
charges of fake news—because we are
looked to. I believe, like Reagan said,
we could be that city on the hill, but
we are up high, and folks are going to
look to us.
But what is the world order going to
be? What is democracy globally going
to look like? Are we going to defend democracy and democratic principles or
will we behave like the authoritarians
that we should be against?
So this is a fundamental question
you ask, and it has been resonating all
these 13 hours. We keep coming back to
the Constitution because so many
things the Trump administration is
doing, from the separation of powers to
violating the very first words of our
Constitution, the very first words, this
commitment we make when we swear
oaths, all of us: ‘‘We the People of the
United States’’ of America—this is our
mandate—‘‘in Order to form a more
perfect Union, establish Justice’’—it
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00051 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.136 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2012 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
comes really quick. It comes really
quick. Is it just to disappear a human
being with no due process?
I quoted Antonin Scalia, this conservative that was sitting on a stage
with somebody he had a lot of affection
for, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and this
moderator asked him: Does somebody
in our country have the rights of this
document? And he said: Yes, especially
the 14th Amendment that doesn’t say
any ‘‘citizen’’; it says no ‘‘person,’’ no
body.
So where do we stand when our
Founders, those imperfect geniuses,
say: ‘‘We the People . . . in Order to
form a more perfect Union’’—‘‘We the
People of the United States, in Order
to form a more perfect Union, establish
Justice, insure domestic Tranquility,
provide for the common defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure
the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves
and our Posterity’’—what Nation are
we turning over to the next President,
to the next Congress, when this Congress is sacrificing the powers that are
given right underneath that preamble?
It is article I which spells out: ‘‘All legislative Powers herein granted shall be
vested in a Congress of the United
States, which shall consist of a Senate
and House of Representatives.’’
And then it goes on to talk about
what we have the power to do. We set
the laws.
This President is invoking emergency powers like the alien insurrection act, a 1790-something law that the
last time it was used was in World War
II to detain Japanese Americans—
something so shameful—to put them in
concentration camps here in America.
He wants to take power from our
Congress. And the thing that is killing
me, that is actually breaking my
heart, Brother WARNOCK, the thing
that is actually breaking my heart is
that we are letting him, that we are
letting him take our power.
If Elon Musk were a Democrat and
Joe Biden said, ‘‘Hey, go after the
spending power of Congress,’’ all the
things that they approved—it is hard
to do bipartisan things here. God bless
PATTY MURRAY and SUSAN COLLINS
coming together and getting spending
bills—hard work—done. Lord knows, I
sometimes play a little Motown in
here. I ain’t too proud to beg. I go to
the Appropriations leader and say:
Hey, my New Jerseyans in this county
need this. We work on all these—I fight
for programs with LINDSEY GRAHAM
and USAID with now-Secretary of
State Marco Rubio, programs that he
approved.
The Department of Education. I have
worked with Republicans to put things
in the Department of Education. There
are people here that worked in a bipartisan way to try to simplify the
FAFSA forms. I could go through all
the work we have done that now this
body—the article I branch of the Constitution, right under the mandate of
the United States of America, as TINA
SMITH is telling us, right after ‘‘We the
People of the United States, in Order
to form a more perfect Union, establish
Justice’’—the Senator, my friend, and
so that is why we are here. That is
why, now, the Senate is filling up. It is
friends galore. We have AMY KLOBUCHAR now on the floor.
That is why we are here. No business
as usual. No business as usual. We are
not doing the usual order. We are talking about these things. We are making
the case. We talked about immigration. We talked about Medicaid. We
talked about Medicare. We talked
about healthcare. We talked about
medical research. We talked about Social Security. We are marching
through. We are marching through.
Thirteen hours. I have more in the
tank.
And so I thank you for that question.
It brings up very emotional things for
me; I will be honest. It brings up pain
and frustration and hurt. It brings up,
for me, the pain of so many New
Jerseyans that have reached out—the
Palestinian doctors in my State who
worked with my office to get Palestinian babies into America for care. It
brings up the hurt of being there and
seeing the worst slaughter of Jews
since the Holocaust.
So many things are painful, but if we
sacrifice our values, it reminds me of
the mosque being built, 9/11. It reminds
me of all these difficult points: the
marchers in Skokie, of KKK—all these
difficult points where the values of this
Constitution were tested, where we
were being measured.
But I have to say, what this President is doing with the alien insurrection act, what this President is doing
with no due process, what this President is doing with flushing the Department of Education, with getting rid of
the USAID, with attacking thousands
of people that serve our veterans and
that serve our Social Security—those
things should be obvious to this institution, to the Senate, that that is
wrong, that they have unelected—the
biggest campaign donor, unelected,
who is getting our personal information, and there is no transparency. Nobody in this body can say they know
what confidential information was let
out, Elon Musk has, and knows what
they do with it because they didn’t
bring him here to answer for it.
So I thank my colleague for the question. And I know Reverend WARNOCK is
going to ask me one. I just want to
take us a couple pages into this for a
second.
The American people alone, our approach to foreign policy practiced by
the President—what the President has
done is left our allies feeling abandoned, feeling degraded and insulted.
He has left our adversaries feeling
emboldened and has done things that
have hurt our national security, that
has made Americans less safe.
In the short time President Trump
has been in office for a second term,
Americans have already been put in
harm’s way because of the reckless approach of the administration. It all begins, in fact, with his extremely poor
judgment. This administration has
prioritized the obsequiousness to Donald Trump over the expertise when it
comes to some of the most important
national security jobs, and it has sidelined dedicated professionals who have
devoted their lives to keeping our
country safe.
This administration has also demonstrated an inability to distinguish
between America’s adversaries and
America’s allies and a disturbing failure to understand how America’s partnerships and investments abroad protect and benefit communities here.
I am reminded of General Mattis saying: If you are cutting things like the
USAID or the State Department, buy
me more bullets.
But this is something that folks on
the floor have talked about. I see one
of my friends and somebody I really
look up to—I see TIM KAINE—who sits a
little bit higher up on the dais than I
on the Foreign Relations Committee,
somebody I have turned to many times.
And he was astonished by this. And I
know he, like me, has had private conversations with our Republican colleagues about this. But this body has
not called for one hearing or one investigation. No accountability.
What am I talking about? It is when,
last week, we learned Vice President
JD VANCE, Secretary of Defense Pete
Hegseth, Secretary of State Marco
Rubio, Director of National Intelligence Tulsi Gabbard, Director of the
CIA John Ratcliffe, Trump’s National
Security Advisor Mike Waltz, Special
Envoy for the Middle East Steve
Witkoff, and several other high-ranking officials in the Trump administration discussed attack plans against the
Houthis in Yemen in a group chat over
the commercial messaging app Signal.
We learned of this because the President’s National Security Advisor mistakenly invited the editor-in-chief of
The Atlantic, Jeffrey Goldberg, on the
text chain. And after Jeffrey Goldberg
published a story describing this jawdropping national security failure
where they could have broken at least
two laws that I am aware of just by
doing that—from the preservation of
public records all the way to disclosing
national security, highly classified information—the President and his Cabinet members didn’t step up and say,
‘‘We made mistakes,’’ didn’t step up
and say, ‘‘This is clearly abjectly
wrong,’’ didn’t step up and say, ‘‘There
will be accountability,’’ didn’t step up
and say, ‘‘We will take actions.’’ No.
What they decided to do when they
were exposed is actually target the reporter with a barrage of insults and not
acknowledging any wrongdoing.
Unsurprisingly, the Trump team’s response led Jeffrey Goldberg to publish
the rest of the Signal chat messages,
which exposed more administration
lies.
We are going to go into that, but I
really want to turn to my brother. And
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00052 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.137 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2013
I said earlier about Senator MURPHY’s
speech, one of my favorites I have ever
actually heard when I was in the Senate—Brother WARNOCK gave a speech
that was one of my favorites in the
Senate, too, when he talked about the
difference between January 5 America
and that fateful day, January 6.
He has been a friend of mine for a
long time. I think he might be the only
person in this body—I started this talk
13 hours ago by talking about getting
into good trouble. I think you might be
the only person in this body that was
arrested in this building for protesting
before you came to serve in this building as a U.S. Senator.
I am going to stick to what I am told
to say. If you ask me that you would
like to speak—you have to say, ‘‘I
would like to ask you a question.’’ I
think that is how this goes.
Mr. WARNOCK. Will the Senator
from New Jersey yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. Why, yes. I will yield
for a question while retaining the floor.
Mr. WARNOCK. Good morning, and
let me just say, CORY BOOKER, how
very, very proud I am of you. It is a
real honor to serve in this body.
I know that all of my colleagues who
are here agree that it is an honor for
the people of your State to say that
when we take stock of all the issues
that we wrestle with, as we look into
the eyes of our children and consider
what we want for them, and into the
eyes of our aging parents as they deal
with the blessings and the burdens of
getting older, since all of us can’t go to
Washington, we are going to send you.
And we are going to trust that, in
rooms of power where decisions are
being made, you are going to center
the people and not yourself. You are
going to be thinking about ordinary
people.
And so CORY BOOKER, I want to thank
you for holding vigil. As I prepare to
ask you a question, I just want to
thank you for holding vigil for this
country all night.
Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel said
that when he marched with Dr. King,
he felt like his legs were praying.
So in a very real sense, your legs
have been praying as you have been
standing on this floor all night. And
thank you for praying not just with
your lips but with your legs for a nation in need of healing.
I just got off a prayer call that I do
every Tuesday morning at 7:14 a.m.
That is 2 Chronicles 7:14:
If my people, who are called by my name,
will humble themselves, and pray, and seek
my face, and turn from their wicked ways;
then I will hear from heaven, and I will forgive their sin, and will heal the land.
The Nation needs healing. We need
spiritual healing. We need moral healing.
But, literally, there are people all
across our country who need healing,
who need healthcare. So that is why I
was so proud to come to this Senate
after being arrested in the Rotunda a
few years before that, proud to join you
in the Senate, proud that we were able
to pass, just a couple of months after I
got here, the American Rescue Plan,
which did so much incredible work.
In that American Rescue Plan, there
was the expanded child tax credit,
which literally cut child poverty more
than 40 percent in our country. I wish
we could get it extended.
One of the other things we did was we
lowered Georgians’ and Americans’
healthcare premiums by hundreds of
dollars on average.
We passed a tax cut—and that is so
relevant in this moment because that
is what this body is prepared to do, I
guess, in the next few days—pass the
tax cut, but that tax cut is literally
going to be for the richest of the rich,
the wealthiest among us.
But we passed a tax cut that brought
healthcare into reach for tens of thousands of Georgians and millions of
Americans in the American Rescue
Plan. These tax credits are so critical
that the nonpartisan Congressional
Budget Office said that the number of
Americans without healthcare would
grow by 3.8 million people in just 1
year if the premium subsidies were allowed to expire.
Forgive me for my phone ringing. My
8-year-old and 6-year-old are calling
me. They are not impressed with what
I am doing.
Mr. BOOKER. That is an important
phone call.
Mr. WARNOCK. They are not impressed.
But we know that this would impact
thousands of Georgians who have only
recently been able to receive
healthcare. We passed in that American Rescue Plan these tax credits,
which put healthcare in reach, and now
they are set to expire if we don’t do our
work. That is why what you are doing,
CORY BOOKER, is holy work. It is within
a political context, but this is holy
work.
If these tax credits are allowed to expire, a 45-year-old in Georgia with
$62,000 in annual income would see premiums go up by $1,414 a year.
A 60-year-old couple in Georgia with
an $82,000 annual income would see premiums go up by a staggering $18,157 a
year. Think about that.
Nearly one-third of Americans have
less than $500 in savings in their bank
account. Imagine the healthcare costs
for a 60-year-old couple going up by
more than $18,000.
A health insurance premium hike
like this would be more than an inconvenience. It wouldn’t just be a nuisance. It is literally the difference between having healthcare coverage and
not having healthcare coverage.
So I am thinking about people like
that. I am thinking about my constituent Cassie Cox from Bainbridge,
GA. She wasn’t able to afford
healthcare on the Affordable Care Act
marketplace until the premium tax
credit brought healthcare into reach.
Shortly after she became insured, she
severely cut her hand, which landed
her in the emergency room with 35
stitches. With insurance, it still cost
her about $300. Had it not been for the
tax credits that allowed her to get
healthcare, she could have been in financial ruin.
She is one of the hundreds of thousands of Georgians at risk of losing
their coverage if these tax credits are
allowed to expire, if we don’t do our
work, if we are more focused on the
wealthiest of the wealthy rather than
the concerns of ordinary people.
Senator BOOKER, should Democrats
and Republicans come together to extend the premium tax credit for hardworking folks in New Jersey and in
Georgia? What do you think?
Mr. BOOKER. That is my easiest colleague’s question I have gotten within
these 13 hours.
Yes, they should. I was talking in the
healthcare section about, while there
are these big issues that we should be
concerned about—$880 billion for Medicaid—cutting all of that out to give to
the wealthiest, as you said—God bless
them; they don’t need our help; they
don’t need more tax cuts—to give them
tax cuts, and explode the deficit, this is
literally taking from working Americans.
The letters we read, the voices of
Americans, the fear, the anguish, the
hurt, the worry, people who were suffering from Parkinson’s, who had children with disabilities, who had elder
parents living with them, so many people telling them—not $880 billion, their
whole financial well-being was hanging
on a thread and just cutting transportation programs involved.
But I said, while all that was going
on, the Trump administration was still
doing other things to attack ACA enrollment, to attack the tax credits that
people are relying on, and doing other
things to drive up costs.
I know some of my colleagues are on
the floor, like AMY KLOBUCHAR. We
have centered the lowering prescription costs, and he is doing things to
drive out-of-pocket costs up. There is a
cruelty in that.
And I intend to still be standing at
noon, when we have the pause in the
Senate for the Pledge and the prayer.
And, Pastor, I want to talk to you in
the way that you talked to me last
night.
I called my brother, I called my
friend, and told him I was doing this—
and WARNOCK shifts gears a lot in my
life. Sometimes, he is my colleague.
Sometimes, he is my brother. Sometimes, we talk about the state of unmarried guys in the Senate. I won’t put
you on blast, sir.
Mr. WARNOCK. The bald-headed caucus.
Mr. BOOKER. The bald-headed caucus.
But the one time you shifted gears
into being my pastor and my friend, we
prayed together last night. And most
Americans identify in our faith—the
Christian faith. And you and I know—
I would yield for you to ask a question,
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00053 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.138 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2014 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
but I am yielding just to have you talk
about Matthew 25.
Mr. WARNOCK. Right. Right. I am a
Matthew 25 Christian.
Mr. BOOKER. You and I both. That is
what we hold in common.
Mr. WARNOCK. It is a long chapter,
but in the section we are talking
about, in Matthew 25, Jesus says: I was
hungry and you fed me. I was thirsty
and you gave me something to drink. I
was sick.
Mr. BOOKER. What were you?
Mr. WARNOCK. I was in prison, and
you came to visit me. And someone
asked: Lord, when were You sick?
When were You in prison? When were
You an undocumented immigrant?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes. Yes.
Mr. WARNOCK. And the answer
comes: In as much as you have done it
to the least of these, you have done it
also unto me.
Another part of that text says: And
when you don’t do it for the least of
these, you don’t do it for me.
The Scripture says that the one who
gives to the poor renders to the Lord.
This is holy work.
Mr. BOOKER. Sir, my friend, I don’t
understand how a nation could allow a
President to be so cruel that he would
take away healthcare from people
struggling with children that are facing the worst of health challenges, people who have a spouse like the person
who wrote to me—no, it wasn’t a
spouse. She wrote me herself. She had
Parkinson’s.
I got upset because that is how my
father died. I watched, year after year
after year, how it affected my family,
how it demanded from my mother, how
it cost thousands of dollars for his
care. And thank God we have the privilege. But this person was writing because they were afraid, and they didn’t
know what the costs would be.
How can our country say that kind of
cruelty—how could a nation where the
majority of its people are people of
faith, be they Muslim or Jain or Baha’i
or Hindu or Jewish—how can the central precept of our country, founded on
principles that are reflected in the
Good Book—how could we say that we
should cut healthcare from the sick
and the needy to give bigger tax cuts
to Elon Musk?
Mr. WARNOCK. Will the Senator
from New Jersey yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield to you, my
brother, while retaining the floor.
Mr. WARNOCK. You know, this is the
reason why every Sunday and every
weekend, when I leave here, I return
not only to Georgia, but I return to my
pulpit. Some folks ask: Why do you
continue to lead Ebenezer Church?
I return to my pulpit every Sunday
because, notwithstanding wonderful
people like you, I don’t want to spend
all my time talking to politicians. I am
afraid I might accidentally become
one.
So I want to connect and check in
with ordinary folks because I was focused on this healthcare issue long before I came to the Congress.
Dr. King said that of all injustices,
inequality in healthcare is ‘‘the most
shocking and the most inhumane.’’
Mr. BOOKER. I read that last night,
Pastor. I read that last night.
Mr. WARNOCK. ‘‘The most shocking
and most inhumane.’’
It is the reason why, as a pastor, inspired by Dr. King, leading the congregation that Dr. King led—way back
in 2014, when the Affordable Care Act
was passed, were you here? You came
after.
Mr. BOOKER. I came after.
Mr. WARNOCK. You came right after
that.
I got arrested in the Governor’s office
in Georgia, fighting for healthcare.
Mr. BOOKER. I didn’t know you were
a two-time arrestee, man.
Mr. WARNOCK. I got a long record,
brother, but, also, good trouble.
Mr. BOOKER. Oh, good trouble.
Mr. WARNOCK. Good trouble.
We had a 1960 sit-in in the Governor’s
office. Waves of us got arrested. They
arrested one wave. Then another wave
came, and another wave came. We were
trying to get Georgia to expand Medicaid.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I remember that.
Mr. WARNOCK. We passed the Affordable Care Act here, but Georgia
was digging in its heals, and said: No,
we are not going to expand Medicaid.
So when I got here, Senator KLOBUCHAR, I made it a priority of mine to
get incentives for Georgia to expand
Medicaid. And you remember, I went to
our caucus and I said: Look, Georgia
and about 9—then 10—other States
have not expanded. They should have
done it a long time ago. Let’s see if we
can make it even easier for them.
As a freshman Senator, I was able to
convince our caucus to give $14.5 billion for nonexpansion States, which includes $2 billion just for Georgia to
incentivize Medicaid expansion.
Why? So that working people in the
gap, people who literally go to work
every day, can get healthcare. Georgians left at $2 billion sitting on the
table and almost 600,000 Georgians in
the gap. The Governor’s plan has literally enrolled a whopping 6,500 people
in healthcare, but we got nearly 600,000
people in the gap. This is not theoretical stuff.
Every time I talk about this, I have
to talk about Heather Payne, because
Heather Payne is a resident of Dalton,
GA. She spent her career taking care of
others. She is a traveling nurse. Heather worked throughout COVID as an ER
and labor and delivery nurse, yet,
often, she did not have healthcare coverage herself because she fell into the
healthcare coverage gap. Sometimes
she had health insurance coverage;
sometimes she didn’t.
She made too much money to qualify
for Medicaid, but the only coverage options available to her were
unaffordable, costing anywhere between $500 and $1,000 a month. And so
about 21⁄2 years ago, Heather Payne, a
traveling nurse, noticed that something was wrong in her body. And even
though she noticed that something was
wrong, Senator KLOBUCHAR, she literally had to wait for months before
she could see a doctor, to save up her
money.
And then she finally went and saw a
neurologist who said: Do you know
what? You have actually had a series of
small strokes. And even after getting
that diagnosis, she had to put off serious medical procedures because she
cannot work as an ER nurse anymore
and is still waiting to get approved for
disability so she can get Medicaid coverage.
And so this nurse, who has spent her
whole life healing other people, can’t
get healthcare. I think it is wrong that
in the richest country on Earth, we
don’t want to lower the cost of
healthcare for people who are working
hard in our communities every day, literally keeping us healthy.
I am going to ask you another softball question, Senator BOOKER. Should
people like my friend Heather Payne
have access to affordable healthcare?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes.
Mr. WARNOCK. In the first few
months of the Trump administration,
it has been clear that this administration is not working for—
Mr. BOOKER. I am going to just say
this just to try to stay in the parliamentary—I yield for a question
while retaining the floor. I yield for another question while retaining the
floor.
Mr. WARNOCK. The administration
is working for the billionaires. They
are working for people like Elon Musk.
Healthcare is a human right.
Healthcare is basic. And while we are
speaking about health, we have got to
cheer on our Federal workers who are
keeping us healthy. And there are folks
in this administration who say that
they want to make them the villains.
That is what Russell Vought said, that
‘‘when they wake up in the morning,
we want them to not want to go to
work,’’ our Federal workers, ‘‘because
they are increasingly viewed,’’ he said,
‘‘as the villains.’’
I have got news for Russell Vought.
The people who staff our VA hospitals
are not villains. The people who keep
our food safe and our water clean are
not villains. The people who keep our
military bases operating are not villains. And so we stand with them in
this moment because they are keeping
all of us healthy.
And so in closing—and nobody believes a Baptist preacher when he says
in closing—let me say that, again, you
are doing holy work here, brother, by
holding this floor.
You are literally holding vigil for our
Nation. We are beset by the politics of
fear. The scripture tells us that perfect
love casts out all fear. We are witnessing, again, this ugly game, the politics of us and them.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes.
Mr. WARNOCK. And there are a lot
of folks who, because so much of what
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00054 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.140 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2015
has been going on in our Nation across
Republican and Democratic administrations—let’s be honest—has not been
working for ordinary people. And the
gap between the haves and the havenots has gotten larger and larger. And
when people are vulnerable, sometimes
they give in to the politics of fear,
somebody telling them that they have
got all the answers.
And so we saw this in this last cycle;
we are seeing it in this moment in our
country—the politics of us and them.
And sadly, hard-working, workingclass people are waking up this morning, and they are discovering that they
thought they were in the ‘‘us,’’ and
they are discovering that they are in
the ‘‘them.’’ That the ‘‘them’’ is larger
than they thought.
And so we have got to hold vigil for
each other, for workers, for women, for
immigrants, for immigrant families,
for our sisters and our brothers, red,
yellow, brown, Black, and White; for
the aging who need Social Security; for
the working poor who need Medicaid;
for those who are seeking asylum and
they just need a dignified path; for
those who have been working here for
years and they need a dignified path to
citizenship. We have got to hold vigil
for each other.
And so thank you for this work. This
is not the end, but the beginning. The
struggle continues. Dr. King said that
the true measure of a person is not
where he stands in moments of comfort
and convenience but where he stands in
moments of challenge and controversy.
So thank you for praying for this Nation with your lips and with your legs.
I am going to ask you one last question. Do you intend to keep praying?
Mr. BOOKER. Amen, hallelujah, yes,
I do. Thank you for that question.
I know there is going to be a question
coming to me, I just want to say pray
Isaiah 40:31 for me.
Mr. WARNOCK. Got it, got it. I am
going to ordain this man.
Mr. BOOKER. All right. The article I
was going to start reading—
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Senator BOOKER.
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor. The Senator
asked a question. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. So you will yield
for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, while retaining
the floor, yes.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Very good. I want
to, first of all, thank you, thank you
for waking us up this morning, literally. All night as Reverend WARNOCK
would tell you, I know you were in here
doing your work, but it was raining,
there was thunder, it was really bad.
And then when we woke up this morning, you were still talking. You were
still talking, and the sun was out, and
you are giving people hope.
When I think about what you are
doing, you are like an alarm clock
right now for this country, and, slowly
but surely, we have seen people realize,
this isn’t just a bunch of campaign
rhetoric that is going on, this is actually happening. And people are stepping up. They are fighting it in the
courts. They are fighting it in Congress. With what you are doing today,
with what—as you know, last week
when we got the horrible news that the
Defense Secretary of the United States
was using an unauthorized line to just
talk with his friends like he was spiking a football, about putting the lives
of our servicemembers at risk, people
stood up. Democrats stood up. They
asked the tough questions.
And one of the things that bothers
me is that it is so hard to see your way
out of it. A lot of people feel like we
are just wallowing right now. But what
you are telling us today is there is another way. Because if we just wallow,
these guys are going to continue to cut
kids’ cancer treatment. If we just wallow, they are going to cut Medicaid
when one out of two seniors in my
State who are in assisted living are on
Medicaid, or they are going to continue
to mess around with these tariffs,
which really are national sales tax,
something like $2,500 for every single
family.
They are going to continue to be callous. I had someone say to me last
night: Do they care? Do they care when
those USAID workers who devoted
their lives to feeding the hungry
around the world, when they have to
stand outside the building and watch
them literally take the name of their
life’s work off the brick on that building? Do they care?
And one of the things that we have
done—the Democrats have done—has
stood up. And what is coming upon us
in these next few weeks is this tax bill
that, basically, will give billionaires
tax cuts on the backs of regular people—ransacking the government, firing
veterans, messing around with Social
Security.
I had a guy tell me that he spent 3
days after his wife died in Minnesota—
3 days—just trying to figure out how he
gets the death benefit, why did this
dang check show up at his door? He is
trying to do the right thing. He calls,
he gets put on hold. He sends an e-mail,
no one writes him back. He drives into
Brainerd, MN, 30-mile drive. He is like
80 years old. He drives in there, and
then they finally help him. Then he
gets back, and something else goes
wrong. Then he tries to call again. Finally, ends up at our door at our office,
and we figure it out for him.
There is 70-some million people that
that is going to happen to if these guys
don’t get their act together. So it is a
real good question: Do they care? But
when we have this tax bill coming up
in front of us in these next few weeks,
I think people have got to understand
what is going on.
They have to understand that even—
the thing, the House budget that came
out that will be the subject of this, it
is over $2 trillion tax cuts for people
making over $400,000 a year like Elon
Musk, that don’t need it.
And so there is actually a way to
stop it that is in the hands of the Republicans right now.
If just two or three of them stood up
on the House floor and did what you
did—Senator BOOKER, if they said no,
and if four of them in the U.S. Senate,
four of them stood up, four Senators
stood up, then we could have the discussion about, OK, let’s make government work, we are all in, but let’s not
do it on the backs of regular people.
Let’s not do it on the backs of kids
that are in cancer research or veterans
who are trying to simply get their
well-earned benefits because they put
their lives on the line in the battlefield. Or let’s not do it on the backs of
farmers in Minnesota and Georgia who
simply have these small farms and
they are trying to get by. And then,
suddenly, wham, Donald Trump decides
shock and awe, let’s do a tariff and
let’s get mad at all our allies across
the country like Canada. Oh, that is a
good idea.
Those are the things they are doing.
So my question of you is, how many
people need to stand up in the U.S.
Senate to make this happen? Because I
know Democrats are united. I know we
are all standing up, but tell me how
many people need to stand up on the
other side, if they joined up and joined
you, what a difference it would make?
(Mr. RICKETTS assumed the Chair.)
Mr. BOOKER. So I want to thank the
Senator for the question, and when I
think of people who stand in adversity,
I still see you standing in a snowstorm
and the strength that you have had and
stood up to fight for affordable
healthcare, stood up and fought for affordable prescription drugs, stood up
and fought for farmers and police officers and communities.
You are that kind of person that
gives me strength that I have learned
so much from. And you have brought
this issue up, what you just said on the
floor, to let you know, this is not
performative for her. She has brought
this up in our small meetings with
CHUCK SCHUMER. She has brought this
up in our caucus meetings. I have seen
her talk about it in her own State.
This question of what will it take?
And here is something that pains me
to hear, that Elon Musk is calling Republicans up and saying: If you take
this stand, I am going to put $100 million in a primary against you, that
they are bullying people who dare to
stand up and say, maybe this appointee
is not the most qualified person you
could find to lead this Cabinet position,
or maybe it is wrong to cut this Agency that we together created in Congress.
There are people who are asking
those questions, but we have seen them
get dragged through X, mob attacked
when it comes to their virtual presence, and threatened to be primaried.
But we know, because you are somebody that works on both sides of the
aisle, that there are really good people
of conscience on both sides of the aisle.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00055 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.141 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
And as the great pastor said: There are
enough sins in this body to go around
for all of us.
But this is not a partisan moment; it
is a moral moment. This is not a left or
right moment; it is a right or wrong
moment.
Mr. WARNOCK. Right.
Mr. BOOKER. We have a President
that is shredding the very Agencies
that Americans who are struggling are
relying on.
Working people that, over the last 71
days, are finding higher prices, that are
finding housing prices go up. Farmers
in your State—my State too; it is our
fourth largest industry. I have had
farmers come to me from as far away
as Texas and tell me: They are clawing
back these contracts that we have already relied on to buy things, and now
you are putting me in a situation
where I might lose my farm.
You see veterans who come to our offices—I know they come to your office,
Senator KLOBUCHAR; you are a Senator
from Minnesota, but you are a national
figure, so I know they are coming to
your office—and they are saying things
to me like: I am a veteran. I could go
do other jobs. I wanted to work on suicide prevention and mental health
issues, and I am being fired?
And you said it right. I have heard
you say it in private. I have heard you
say it in public. I know it irks you because you are one of those sort of balanced people. OK, we have a big deficit.
That is a real problem. Maybe they are
trying to lower the deficit, but they
are not. That is the irony. They are
not. They are about to explode trillions
of dollars, most of which disproportionately goes to the wealthiest people, as
you have been pointing out in our private phone calls over and over again,
Senator KLOBUCHAR.
So your question to me is spot on. It
is spot on. And it is why I am standing
here right now at the top of another
hour, because of what you are saying
relentlessly, persistently, and
unyieldingly.
Why are we hurting American farmers? We just talked about rural hospitals here for about 20, 30 minutes and
what the threats are to them. We
talked about rural Social Security centers and the threats that are to them.
We talked about communities all over
our country that are being hurt. And
your question, why? To give tax breaks
that will disproportionately go to the
wealthiest Americans.
You and I are not those people that
demonize wealth. We don’t demonize
success. I want more people to start
businesses. I want more people to
dream of moving on up like the Jeffersons. I want more people to have that
vision. I am not one of those people
that are going to be mad at you because you are very successful. I am
going to be one of those people that
say: You don’t need more tax cuts.
We as a society have an obligation to
each other, to those farmers, to those
rural folks, to the cops I stood with at
the funeral of one of their colleagues in
Newark 2 weeks ago. We have an obligation to them to help them get equipment to protect themselves.
This country cannot do something
that is so monumentally fiscally irresponsible.
Who was the one person in the House
that voted—a Republican that voted
against it? A guy named MASSIE? And I
watched. I had to smile and laugh because he said the quiet part out loud.
He was sitting there looking at something. I saw him in an interview. He
said: By their own numbers, this
doesn’t add up. They are adding to our
deficit by the trillions.
He stayed true to his principles.
What happened to all those mighty
deficit hawks in the House of Representatives on the Republican side
that caved to the pressure of a President?
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Will the Senator
yield?
Mr. BOOKER. So happy you asked it
in the right fashion.
I yield for a question while retaining
the floor.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Very good. That
was perfect.
So I think one of the things you
talked about was just this deficit and
what is happening and what we are seeing with their proposal that is going to
come right before us. By some estimates, it is going to add $37 trillion—
$37 trillion in 30 years as we go ahead.
I mean, I literally cannot believe that
when, in fact, we could step back now,
and we can say: What things can we do?
What things can we do on the Tax
Code? There are a whole lot of things
we can do to strengthen Social Security, strengthen what we have in our
government.
When you step back and look at the
economy—and I heard this the other
day on a business channel. Just about a
month or two ago, man, we were coming out strong. We are a country that
came out of the pandemic in a stronger
way than so many other countries did
around the world. We are ready. Inflation was at least steady, and it was
starting to come down here. Now, all of
a sudden, we see chaos is up, corruption is up, and, yes, costs are up. Ask
anyone at the grocery store.
One of the problems when you look
at what we could be doing to address
the debt is that the proposals out there
are just going to make it worse. That
means more interest payments. That
means more interest payments on the
backs of regular people. That means
there is less we can do to help them as
we look at what is happening now.
One of the things you raised, Senator
BOOKER—and I appreciate how much
you know about this—is just this prescription drug negotiation and Medicare. So what do we finally do?
Decades before you or Senator MURPHY or Senator WARNOCK got here, before I even got to this place, they made
a sweetheart deal with the pharmaceutical companies, and they actually
baked in so they didn’t have to negotiate prices for 73 million people on
anything. They could just charge whatever they wanted for these prescription
drugs.
What happened? Well, guess what
happened. Suddenly, the drugs for seniors are 2 to 1 what they are in places
like Canada—our neighbor, our friend—
2 to 1 what they are over there. You
have people driving up to Canada from
Minnesota because we can see Canada
from our porch, and they are going up
there, trying to get less expensive
drugs.
What is going on? So a whole bunch
of people started to say: Let’s look at
this. It took years to get this done. Finally—finally—we passed a bill that
said they have to negotiate, and we
took the first 10 drugs. The last administration got to pick those drugs, and
they picked blockbuster drugs—drugs
like Eliquis, drugs like Xarelto, drugs
like Januvia, Jardiance. I memorize
them because I can always find people
that take them. I don’t make them
raise their hands if they take them.
But these are blockbuster drugs, and
they reduced the price by like 70 percent for our seniors. That is going to
kick in soon, but not if this administration messes it up.
What we have seen is everything
from giving Signal lines about secret
battle plans to reporters to deciding
they are going to shut down the people
that worked on protecting our nuclear
facilities and then, oops, we made a
mistake. How about when they said:
We want to do something about avian
flu, but we are going to fire all the people that work there. Oh, no, we are
going to hire them back. That is what
has been going on right now.
So when I look at this really complicated prescription drug negotiation
where you are taking on some of the
biggest companies in the world, I look
at it and say to myself: OK. So our Secretary of Health, Kennedy—he won’t
even agree when he is asked under oath
if he is going to keep this up. They
fired a bunch of people that would
work on it. They haven’t shown they
are going to keep this negotiation
going.
Meanwhile, we have put in place a
$2,000 cap for our seniors out-of-pocket
on drug costs under Medicare. That is
really good. We put in place that insulin limit, 35 bucks a month.
We thank Reverend WARNOCK, and we
thank you, Senator BOOKER, Senator
MURPHY, and everyone that worked on
that. We got that in place.
So now we have the big thing, which
is the negotiation of all these drugs,
because 15 more drugs are coming our
way for negotiations, again blockbuster drugs—Ozempic—blockbuster
drugs. Those drugs are coming their
way for negotiations, but they have not
committed to do that. They have not
committed to do that. Even if they did
commit to do it, do they even have the
people to negotiate, to take on these
major companies?
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00056 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.142 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2017
So my question to you, Senator
BOOKER, after being up all night, after
getting us through the storm of last
night and into the bright sunshine of
today, after holding the floor all this
time—I can’t even imagine how much
your feet must hurt, but those hurting
feet are nothing compared to why you
are doing it, to how the rest of the people in the country—how they are hurting.
My question is, How can they move
forward without trying to save money
for the people of this country? Because
what I see happening—and there are so
many signs. You see it every single
day. When they are getting rid of some
of the people who work on it, then you
are not going to be able to get the Social Security for my friend that I met
from Crosslake, MN; then you are not
going to be able to get that stuff done.
But I think, as we look at those cuts,
it is not just the word ‘‘cut’’; it is,
what effect does it have on real people
when they can’t get their services,
when our veterans, who also have complex ways that they have to deal with
the government, have no one answering
the phone, when they have gotten rid
of veterans that have actually done the
work? So my question here for people
who translate this into the real world
is, What is all this going to mean for
people in the real world, what they are
doing right now?
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you for the
question, Senator KLOBUCHAR. I love
that you are bringing it back to real
people and what effect it is having.
What you are spelling out is something that is really important. There is
a strategy that they have expressly
said: They want to overwhelm you—
not us. They want to overwhelm the
American people. They want to flood
the zone.
So I see a whole bunch of trying to do
things to distract us: Gulf of Mexico,
Gulf of America, Greenland—all these
things to try to whip us up and not pay
attention to what most Americans are
concerned with: Can they make ends
meet?
Even the big reconciliation bill that
they are going to try to do that we
have to find a way to appeal to a small
group of Republican Congresspeople to
stop the cutting of $880 million out of
Medicaid—we went through in great
detail at length last night why that is
bad, but you are pointing to something
even more insidious, which is that big
things are going on. They actually are
cutting the support to get more people
signed up with the ACA—already happened. Make it harder to sign up for
the ACA. They have already cut the
tax credits that are helping people that
are in the ACA get resources to help
with their healthcare costs. They are
going after these things.
Here is one that you know really
well. They are going after—as we talk
about all of these parents struggling
with children and family members with
chronic diseases, we know one of the
things that help people with chronic
diseases is having access to fresh,
healthy foods. But they are cutting access to that for our kids going to
school.
This administration has not only
overseen in 71 days a rise in inflation,
a rise in the cost of groceries, a lowering of people’s 401(K)s with the stock
market going on; it is not only bringing economic chaos, but they are already hurting people on the basic delivery of their services—from taking
thousands of jobs out of Social Security, making it harder for people who
have some problem to get it solved, to
the VA, to the ACA.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Will the Senator
yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I will definitely yield
for a question while retaining the floor.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. I was thinking—as
you talked about the Affordable Care
Act and all the work that went into it
and what came out of it, I was remembering the constant attempts to repeal
that bill. I was remembering when Senator John McCain—I think you were
here for this—came in and kind of did
the unexpected, right? He came in here,
he bucked his party, and he said no. He
didn’t agree with Donald Trump about
this. He didn’t agree with his leaders
on this. He did what he thought was
right.
My issue is that we all have those
moments where we have to make decisions about what we think is right.
And I think about Donald Trump and
he is—just now, just this week, he said
he wanted to violate the Constitution,
which he said practically every single
hour, but he said that he would try to
serve another term and that he would
do this, he would do that. He is literally treating this Presidency like he
is the King, and I guess Elon Musk is
the court jester at his side or the White
House IT guy. But the point is that he
is treating this like a King.
You serve on the Judiciary Committee, and you are a student of history. You are also a scholar in terms of
understanding this government and
how it works. I think one of the things
that are most unsettling for people,
that they just don’t understand, is,
how you could have a President in
place that doesn’t respect that democracy?
I remember when we all gathered for
the inauguration, and I had 4 minutes,
because of my job with the Rules Committee, to address those gathered in
that Rotunda. I noted that our democracy can be a hot mess right now, but
it is still the best form of government
that we have, that our democracy is
truly our shelter in the storm. It is our
shelter in the storm, to quote a great
songwriter from the State of Minnesota.
The reason we don’t have—I know
you may have a few songwriters from
there. If the Senator could yield for
one question, who is your best songwriter and singer from the State of
New Jersey? Just to make clear who it
is.
Mr. BOOKER. Is that your question?
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Do you yield for a
question?
Mr. BOOKER. I will answer that
question by avoiding it because in New
Jersey, there are so many great patron
saints, from the great Bon Jovi, to the
great Bruce Springsteen, to the incredible Queen Latifah, to the ‘‘Chairman
of the Board’’ from New Jersey, the
great Frank Sinatra. So I am not going
to pick. We have so many great singers, rappers like Redman. We are just a
thriving State of—Count Basie. There
are just too many. I would not force
you to do that. Of course, if it is
Prince—
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Prince and Bob
Dylan. But that aside, I am very impressed, Senator BOOKER, that after,
what, 12 hours now, 13 hours, you still
are able to make sure that you mentioned every songwriter.
But that aside, Bob Dylan once had
that great line, ‘‘shelter in the storm.’’
Our democracy is a shelter in a storm.
Then I noted that in some countries,
Presidential inaugurations are held in
gilded palaces—not in the United
States of America. In the United
States of America, it is held in the people’s House.
That is what you are doing right
now, Senator BOOKER. Because the people’s House is where the action should
be. That is article I, and the Constitution specifically says here that we have
equal branches of government.
And the final thing is that the power
in that Rotunda that day—and this is
where we get into Donald Trump
thinking he is King. The power of that
Rotunda didn’t come from the people
in there. It came from the people outside. That is why you see the people
standing up right now—our constituents going to these townhalls, standing
up, breaking the phone lines in the
U.S. Senate, sending in the emails with
their stories that you have heard from
the Senators and that have read on the
Senate floor about things that have
happened to your constituents. That is
the power from the outside.
The question that I ask of you is just
tell me what you think people can do
when you have a President in there
that he thinks he is King and he thinks
that a democracy is just something
that he can shove aside and say whatever he wants and break every rule
that people depend on, that they depend on to be able to vote and participate and have their case made. Tell me
what you think. What is the answer to
that?
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you, Senator. I
will answer that.
I see RON WYDEN has come to the
floor—for both Amy and me, one of the
chair people or, at this point, the ranking member of one of the great committees.
To AMY KLOBUCHAR’s question, I read
a lot of angry letters—people who were
demanding of me to do something to
stop them—do something different:
Stand up. Speak up, Senator. I am
afraid.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00057 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.144 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2018 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Stand up. Speak up, Senator. I am so
angry.
Stand up. Speak up, Senator. The
services for my disabled child are
threatened.
Stand up, speak up.
That is one of the reasons I am doing
this, why my staff and I talked about
this for so many days. Do something to
show, to let our constituents know, to
elevate their voices on the floor, to
read their letters, to read their statements. It is not just New Jerseyans
like you, but hundreds and hundreds of
people who are calling us from other
States.
But I am most moved by the letters
that tell me about their pain or their
challenges or their fears. But they end
that question with your question: I am
here to help. Tell me how I can help.
I am here to help. Tell me how I can
help.
And you said it, Senator.
I read the letter of John McCain last
night, his letter explaining his vote. It
was so beautiful. It was tough, like he
was. It was hard on the whole body.
But he called to principles. Senator
SCHUMER was here when I read it. It
was eerie because he was describing
what was wrong then, which is the
same thing here—that we do need to
make our country better. We do need
to have a bolder vision for healthcare,
a bolder vision for Social Security. We
need to make them work for the people, but we are not doing it here in this
body.
And this man who is not acting like
a President but is trashing our constitutional traditions, violating our
laws, as he is getting tied up in court
but ignoring court orders—and when he
gets a decision he doesn’t like, he
trashes the judges so badly that the
Supreme Court itself finds that it has
to go out and tell him to stop it.
What stopped healthcare from being
taken away the last time wasn’t the
persuasive powers of anybody on this
side of the political aisle of the Senate
convincing anybody over there. I would
like to think it was my eloquence for
LISA MURKOWSKI. I would like to think
it was my high-minded intellect that,
somehow, was damaged playing too
much football, but that, somehow, I
got the right argument to SUSAN COLLINS. That wasn’t it. I would like to
think it was my ability to stand up to
John McCain, himself. No, none of
that. It was the people. It was the people.
You remember the little lobbyists in
their wheelchairs, rolling up to Senators and speaking their heart, telling
them their pain, their fear. It was people coming here and marching; people
coming and flooding the calls, like
they are doing now; people writing letters; people marching; people in their
States, from all political spectrums,
coming in and saying: This is wrong.
This is wrong. This is wrong.
And so if you are asking me what we
can do, I know what we can do, but we
have to, as the great song—Senator
KLOBUCHAR, I had my staff print a
bunch of statements I sent them. I sent
them because I knew they were some of
my favorite people from history. There
is one here by Webster, one by Jefferson, ‘‘Letter from Birmingham Jail,’’
Langston Hughes, something by Harper
Lee, Emma Lazarus.
But here is one. Here is the answer in
a poem. And forgive me for reading
this. I wanted to do it at some point
today. This is perfect. I see my Senator
here may have a question. But I love
this poem. It was written and put to
song by a man named James Weldon
Johnson. He was an educator, a poet, a
civil rights activist. He was born in the
great State of Florida. He said that
this is what we have to do: ‘‘Lift Every
Voice and Sing.’’
Lift every voice and sing,
Till Earth and Heaven ring,
Ring with the harmonies of Liberty;
Let our rejoicing rise
High as the list’ning skies,
Let it resound loud as the rolling sea.
[We must] sing a song full of the faith that
the dark past has taught us,
Sing a song full of the hope that present
has brought us;
Facing the rising sun of a new day begun,
Let us march on till victory is won.
It doesn’t ignore the wretchedness of
our history. It speaks to the truth and
the excitement and the hope about
that past and the virtues that our ancestors gave us. It goes on:
Stony the road we trod,
Bitter the chast’ning rod,
Felt in the days when hope unborn had
died;
Yet with a steady beat,
Have not our weary feet
Come to the place for which our fathers
sighed?
We have come over a way that with tears
has been watered.
We have come, treading our path through
the blood of the slaughtered,
Out from the gloomy past,
Till now we stand at last
Where the white gleam of the bright star is
cast.
The last stanza:
God of our weary years,
God of our silent tears,
Thou who has brought us thus far on the
way;
Thou who hast by Thy might,
Led us into the night,
Keep us forever in the path, we pray.
Lest our feet stray from the places, our
God, where we met Thee,
Lest our hearts, drunk with the wine of the
world, we forget Thee;
Shadowed beneath Thy hand,
May we forever stand,
True to our God,
True to [this] our native land.
What can we do? Do like our ancestors did. What can we do? Do like the
people who never gave up, even when
this country they loved didn’t love
them back. They kept fighting, kept
pushing.
Senator KLOBUCHAR, in my time in
the Senate with you, we have seen
some of the most amazing, shocking
moments with the Obergefell case in
the Supreme Court recognizing the humanity, the dignity, the equal rights of
the LGBTQ Americans to have love and
marry.
We have seen fights, in this time that
we have been here, where we have seen
victories on healthcare that made such
a difference in people’s lives. We have
seen the fights while we have been
here, some of the most painful moments, where we have seen the arc of
the moral universe bent not by the people here, not by the people in this body.
Do you think we got suffrage because a
bunch of men on the Senate floor said:
OK, guys, come on. Put your hands in
here. Ready to give women the right to
vote on three. Ready, break.
That is not how it happened. That is
not how it happened. The power of the
people is greater than the people in
power.
Do you think we got civil rights because one day, Strom Thurmond, after
filibustering for 24 hours—do you think
we got civil rights because he came to
the floor one day and said: I have seen
the light. Let those Negro people have
the right to vote.
No, we got civil rights because people
marched for it, sweat for it, and John
Lewis bled for it.
So I am scared too. But fear is a necessary precondition to courage. I am
angry too. But my mom told me: Never
let your anger consume you. Channel
it. Fuel it so it can help your love be
greater and stronger.
AMY KLOBUCHAR, that is what this
moment needs. Our job in this body is
to be truth tellers. Our job, just as you
said so brilliantly, is to elevate the
voices of the people of the country.
You are right, AMY KLOBUCHAR. This
is the people’s House. It is article I of
the Constitution, and it is under assault. Article I is under assault. Our
spending powers, our budgetary powers, the power to establish Agencies
like the Department of Education and
USAID—it is under assault by a President that doesn’t respect this document.
And how do we stop them? I am sorry
to say, we hold powerful positions. We
were elected by great States, but we
are in the minority right now. You
spelled it out in the beginning of your
questions to me. It will take three people of conscience on that side. It will
take four here.
I am going back to my book because
there is somebody that you know—I
don’t know if my staff put it in at the
last moment. Yes, they did—Margaret
Chase Smith, whom you know.
Margaret Chase Smith, a U.S. Senator from Maine, a Republican. When a
demagogue rose in the land exploiting
people’s fear, deporting Jews who were
not citizens of this country because
they were accusing them of being Communists, at a time that this body was
being twisted and contorted to the will
of a demagogue, where nobody had the
courage to stand up, it was a woman
from the Republican Party that
stood—I don’t know—somewhere in
this body.
Her feet might have been tired. Her
heart might have been hurt. She might
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00058 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.145 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2019
have been afraid of the consequences to
stand up to people preaching the Red
Scare. But this woman in this body, a
rare thing in those years—this woman
in this body, which our Founders—to
those imperfect geniuses who wrote
this Constitution, a woman in this
body wasn’t imagined by our Founders.
Thank God they called upon us to
make a more perfect Union. And generations of activists finally made it
real that women could serve in this
body. She had the courage, the audacity to call her own party to task.
I read her words. She said:
I don’t believe that the Republican party is
in any sense a party of fear, but I do believe
that the Republican Party has made an alliance with the Four Horsemen of fear—the
fear of communism, the fear of labor unions,
the fear of the future, the fear of progress. I
think it is high time that we remembered
that we have sworn to uphold and defend the
Constitution.
She continues:
I think that it is high time that we remembered that the Constitution, as amended,
speaks not only of the freedom of speech but
also the freedom of trial by [jury].
This great Senator, this great Republican, said:
Whether it is criminal prosecutions in the
court or character prosecutions in the Senate, there is little political distinction when
the life of a person has been ruined.
Those of us who shout the loudest about
Americanism in making character assassinations are all too frequently those who, by our
own words and acts, ignore some of the basic
principles [of what it means to be an American]—the right to criticize.
Without thinking the President is
going to drag you from the Oval Office
for criticizing him.
The right to hold unpopular beliefs.
That if you have a belief I find contemptible, it does not mean I can disappear you from a city street.
She goes on:
The right to protest.
That just for assembly and speaking
up, that is not a right to cut hundreds
of billions of dollars for universities’
science funding.
The right to independent thought.
The exercise of these rights should not cost
one single American citizen his reputation or
his right to a livelihood nor should he be in
danger of losing his reputation or livelihood
merely because he happens to know someone
who holds unpopular beliefs.
Like a law firm that represents suing
the President and now has their very
firm, their very livelihoods, the legal
secretaries and others come after
them.
Margaret Chase Smith goes on to call
her party to be a woman of conscience;
to stand up and say ‘‘the American
people are sick and tired of being
afraid to speak their minds lest they be
politically smeared as ‘Communists’ or
‘Fascists’ by their opponents. Freedom
of speech,’’ she says, ‘‘is not what it
used to be in America. It has been so
abused by some that it is not exercised
by others.’’
Dear God, if I stand up in this body
and say it is wrong to put Pete Hegseth
in the Cabinet as Secretary of Defense
because he is unqualified—he is unqualified; he is unqualified—look at a
Signal chat to see how unqualified he
is.
Margaret Chase Smith continues:
As a Republican, I say to my colleagues on
this side of the aisle that the Republican
party faces a challenge today that is not unlike the challenge it faced back in Lincoln’s
day. The Republican party so successfully
met that challenge that it emerged from the
Civil War as the champion of a united nation—in addition to being the party which
unrelentingly fought loose spending and
loose programs.
I doubt if the Republican Party could—
simply because I don’t believe the American
people will uphold any political party that
puts political exploitation above national interest. Surely we Republicans aren’t that
desperate for victory.
I don’t want to see the Republican Party
win that way. While it might be a fleeting
victory for the Republican Party, it would be
a more lasting defeat for the American people. Surely it would ultimately be suicide for
the Republican Party and the two-party system [itself] that has protected our American
liberties from the dictatorship of a one-party
system.
You ask me, AMY KLOBUCHAR, what
do we need to do? We need to call to
the conscience of our comrades in the
people’s branch and say: How could you
go along with a reconciliation that will
put trillions of dollars of debt on our
children and our children’s children?
How could you go along with cutting
$800 billion for Medicaid only to give
tax cuts to the wealthiest, to disproportionately go to the wealthiest?
How could you, in good conscience—if
you are a fiscal hawk, if you are a
Christian conservative, how could you
hurt the weak to benefit the rich and
powerful? That is the answer to your
question.
The people of the United States of
America—all of us—have to stand up
and say: No, not on my watch. I am a
Republican; I am a veteran; I am a police officer; I am a firefighter; I am a
teacher—not in America. We won’t
allow this. We won’t allow this. We
won’t allow this.
Mr. WYDEN. Will the Senator from
New Jersey yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield for a question while retaining the floor.
Mr. WYDEN. I thank my colleague.
I have been listening to this, a Herculean presentation, for hours and hours.
Your remarks reflect the urgency of
our times, Senator BOOKER, and I
thank you for it.
Let me frame the question this way:
I hold open-to-all townhall meetings in
every county in my State each year. I
have had more than 1,100 of them. And
since Donald Trump took office, what
we have seen in these townhall meetings is fear and terror, and, I might
add, record turnouts.
I was in a small town in central Oregon recently, Sisters. We had almost
1,400 people there. And what people
asked about and you have touched on
this morning, is, of course, Medicaid
and Social Security because these are
programs involving healthcare and retirement that are really the connective
tissue between the government and our
people.
These programs make it possible for
people to pay for essentials. They are
not going to fancy places. They are
buying groceries. They are paying rent.
They are buying medicine.
We had one separate townhall meeting, I say to my colleague, just with
Federal employees whose goal is to get
out in the woods and help prevent fire
in Oregon. I organized this meeting.
They, too, are terrified. They have
dedicated their lives to trying to help.
We serve the American people. And I
am telling you, I have seen service in
action over the last few hours with
your reflecting the urgency of our
times. Our salaries are paid for by taxpayers, and I am particularly troubled
by the fact that we are getting all
these reports that many Senators are
saying: I am not going to do townhall
meetings.
They are on the other side of the
aisle. As I said, I have had 1,100 of
them, 10 of them so far this year. It
seems to me, that is refusing to answer
to constituents.
You have been here all night, and
you are setting a very clear example
about what it means to push back
against authoritarianism.
So just like I have townhall meetings, my question to my friend from
New Jersey is, What are you hearing
from home? It is a pretty straightforward question, but it sure as heck is
what the times are all about because
people are saying: What are you doing
back there? What is important to you?
I talk about town meetings. I had a
tele-townhall, I say to my friend, during the speech that was being made on
the floor of the House. I had 30,000 people participating. That is a lot for my
small State. So I know what I am
doing, and I think the American people
would like to hear a bit about what my
colleague is hearing from his State and
why it is so important that he is out
here mopping his brow today trying to
stay on his feet, making the case for
the urgency of our time. What are you
hearing?
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator.
I am hearing a lot of fear, a lot of
anger. I am hearing heads of hospitals
say that this is outrageous, the threats
to our hospitals in New Jersey. I am
hearing heads of critical health services tell me what the Medicaid cuts
will mean to their organizations. I am
hearing from Catholic priests who are
doing extraordinary things in service
of their communities. I am hearing
from citizens who are veterans who got
fired from their jobs.
I am hearing from people, as I read
letters, who work in the Social Security Agency and the chaos that has
been created and the deteriorating
service to seniors. I have heard from
seniors who are terrified about what is
being done to Social Security and how
it might affect their lives.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00059 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.146 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2020 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
I am hearing demands from our constituents, people demanding, Senator,
that we do something about the outrages they are seeing.
I think that when I hear New
Jerseyans, by larger and larger numbers—and I will be back in my State. I
know we were planning meetings and a
townhall and a lot more this weekend.
But I have to say now, more than ever,
we need more of it. We need more of it.
And one of the reasons I am here is
because I want to elevate those voices
of my constituents. I want to tell the
stories that my constituents are writing in about and lift their voices and
tell them that they are seen; they are
heard.
I have been going through section by
section, as you pointed out: Social Security, a section on healthcare, a section on education and the Department
of Education and the work that it does.
I have been going point by point
through.
This is the agenda. I didn’t know how
much of it I could get through. But we
laid it out. We have binders for each
one of these issues. Immigration, we
went through. We have housing, the environment, farmers and food, veterans,
the corruption that has been normalized by this President, the rule of law,
public safety—all the ways that we
know that there is a crisis in our country, and we, as a nation, need to be
more attuned to it and doing more to
meet this crisis, to rise up and defend
our country, defend our well-being.
And all the while, things are happening that you know. You are the
chairman of the Finance Committee,
and you have these insights. We have
talked about them, about what is
about to happen in this reconciliation
process. I mean, that is one of the more
stunning things that is almost immediate on this floor.
I think we are going to see about the
tariffs tomorrow and see how far the
President will go. But we do know,
whatever it is, it is going to affect
prices that are going to continue to go
up for Americans. This inflation has
continued to go up for Americans as
the stock market continues to go
down, as people’s 401(k)s have lost so
much money.
The uncertainty I am hearing from
businesses in New Jersey, the chaos
that they feel about the economy—the
consumer confidence in this country
has gone way down.
If you ask the question: Are you better off than you were 71 days ago, not
many Americans could say that they
are better off. Their costs are higher.
Their groceries are higher. They are
soon to see everything from car prices
to food go higher. Their retirement security is under attack. Their
healthcare is under attack. They are
losing their Department of Education.
They are less safe from infectious diseases abroad. There are so many things
that we have to talk to and try to stop.
You are our leader on the Finance
Committee, and you know that the tax
thing they are trying to run through
now. I am trying to get my head
wrapped around these whacky parliamentary things that even the
podcast I listen to in the morning to
inform me say they even spoke about
this years and years ago. But they said,
oh, this is too crazy. We can’t do this,
to try to tell the American people
somehow that the trillions of dollars of
tax cuts that we are going to give disproportionately to the wealthiest people of all, oh, there is nothing to see
here; that has a zero impact on the
budget, so we can do it through reconciliation. That is the biggest hocuspocus, manufactured artifice that I
have ever seen to obscure the truth in
America.
What the Republicans are trying to
do is cut massively into healthcare for
Americans in order to give tax cuts disproportionately to the wealthiest who
don’t need it and to drive up the deficits, making our children and our children’s children have a more dangerous
economy and higher and higher debt
payments to make—debt payments
that will skyrocket higher than any
expense the government makes.
We are literally about to see something go through reconciliation that
threatens to sacrifice our children’s future so that the richest of the rich can
get richer.
I know there are a lot of people who
are angry, who are worried, who are
feeling overwhelmed, who are struggling to make ends meet. But I know of
only one way to do this—and I am trying to do it myself—is to do things differently, to stand up, to speak up, to
not act like this is just normal in our
country.
There is not a President, from Eisenhower to Reagan to Bush, on the Republican side who could ever imagine a
day where, in a U.N. vote, we side with
Russia and China against the Western
democracies that we saved in World
War II; that we stormed the beaches of
Normandy for; that we did the Berlin
airlift for; that we did the Marshall
Plan for.
We designed the world order, and now
we are turning our back on it. We designed the rules-based world order, and
we are turning our back on those organizations, from trashing NATO to getting out of the World Health Organization, to getting out of the group of
countries coming together to deal with
climate change.
We are not leading the planet Earth
anymore. Our allies are saying openly
they can’t trust us. The quotes are unbelievable by our allies:
Generations of Americans all know one
thing: Russia is our adversary. This principle
was reinforced after Russia’s brutal,
unprovoked invasion of Ukraine in February
of 2022.
The American public knows a lot
about Putin and his cronies and what
they have done to the brave people of
Ukraine. Russia has abducted over
19,000 children, taking them from their
families and homeland.
Russia has targeted civilians, bombing hospitals and schools, including a
strike on a children’s hospital during
the supposed cease-fire negotiations
just a few weeks ago.
Russian forces have raped and assaulted Ukrainian civilians, and Russia
has tortured prisoners of war.
One would think, given all the horrors inflicted by Russia, that the
United States would continue to treat
Russia as the adversary and the pariah
as other Western democracies treat it.
But that is not what Trump has done.
He has done the opposite.
On the third anniversary of Russia’s
unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, the
administration joined Russia and
North Korea in voting against the resolution condemning the innovation that
has killed over 12,000 Ukrainian civilians and injured 30,000. Imagine that.
I had the Foreign Minister of a great
ally in NATO in my office looking at
me and saying, basically, What the
heck?
My friend CHRIS MURPHY, on the
floor, we sit close to each other. He is
further up the dais than I in Foreign
Relations, and this stuff is insanity.
Here is NBC News:
President Donald Trump has said
Ukraine—not Russia—started the war. He’s
called [the] Ukrainian President Volodymyr
Zelenskyy—not Vladimir Putin—[he called
Zelenskyy] a dictator. Meanwhile, Trump’s
administration is standing down on a suite
of tough anti-Kremlin policies.
In just over a month, Trump has executed
a startling realignment of American foreign
policy, effectively throwing U.S. support behind Moscow and rejecting the tight alliance
with Kyiv cultivated by former President
Joe Biden.
The extraordinary pivot has upended decades of hawkish foreign policy toward Russia
that provided a rare area of bipartisan consensus in an increasingly divided nation.
Trump’s recent moves have drawn international attention, unsettling U.S. allies in
Europe and thrilling conservative populists
who favor a turn away from Zelenskyy.
The new posture was put in stark relief on
Friday during a tense Oval Office meeting—
We all remember this—
between Trump and Zelenskyy. The leaders
clashed in front of the press, raising questions about the future of American support
for Kyiv.
Alliances and partners around the
world are our biggest strength against
any U.S. adversary or competitor, from
China to Russia to Iran to North
Korea. We are the strongest Nation on
the planet Earth, but our strength is
multiplied and magnified when we
stand in alliance with those nations
that share our values and are bonded to
us and are committed to us.
In fact, the only time article 5 in the
United Nations—that article that says
that if one person in NATO is attacked,
everyone is attacked and they all join
together—that one time it happened
was 9/11, when our NATO allies stood
up with America.
And so look at NATO. It has been the
bedrock of the international order for
80 years. It was created in 1949 by 12
countries, including the United States,
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00060 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.147 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2021
to provide collective security and, in
many ways, provide collective security
against the Soviet Union. Since then,
20 more countries have joined NATO
through 10 rounds of enlargement,
bringing the total number of NATO
countries to 32. The most recent additions were Sweden in 2024 and Finland
in 2023, who applied to join NATO in
2022 after Russia invaded Ukraine, because those countries are realizing that
the authoritarian dictator that Putin
is—who threatens his smaller neighbors—those other nations have realized
they should be standing with NATO;
that we have a principle of collective
defense, as I said, enshrined in article 5
of the North Atlantic Treaty. ‘‘Collective defense’’ means an attack on one
ally is considered an attack against all
allies.
A strong NATO has made America
safer and stronger and more prosperous. My colleagues on both sides of
the aisle recognize this. I have been in
this body for 12 years. I have been told
by people who I have learned from
about foreign policy when I came here
as a mayor and leaned on people like
CHRIS COONS and leaned on people like
CHRIS MURPHY, leaned on people like
John McCain, leaned on people like
LINDSEY GRAHAM, leaned on people like
Senator Rubio.
We helped pass a law that enshrined
congressional action before the President can withdraw from NATO. That
law passed with overwhelming bipartisan support—87 Senators voted yes.
Senator Rubio, now Secretary of
State, said:
NATO serves as an essential military alliance that protects shared military interests
and enhances America’s international presence. Any decision to leave the alliance
should be rigorously debated and considered
by the U.S. Congress with the input of the
American people.
Two weeks ago, though, on March 19,
2025, in response to news that the Pentagon may give up the role of supreme
allied commander in Europe, a position
held by an American general since the
NATO alliance was formed in 1949, Republican Senator WICKER and Representative ROGERS signaled their opposition in an extraordinary joint
statement warning Donald Trump that
that change would ‘‘risk undermining
American deterrence around the
globe.’’
I want to read some of the comments
of NATO partners about the damage
that has been done in just the last 71
days of Trump’s leadership in upending
the world order that has helped to keep
America stronger and safer and more
prosperous.
The EU’s top diplomat said ‘‘the free
world needs a new leader.’’ Think
about that. Think about that. The EU’s
top diplomat has said, in response to
Donald Trump, that now the free world
needs a new leader.
Every President of my lifetime was
seen as the leader of the free world, and
now the rest of the free world, its top
diplomat, is saying it is time for that
to change.
The new German Chancellor said:
My absolute priority will be to strengthen
Europe as quickly as possible so that, step
by step, we can really achieve independence
from the USA.
He went on to say:
I never thought I would have to say something like this on a television program. But
after Donald Trump’s statements last week
at the latest, it is clear that the Americans,
at least this part of the Americans, this administration, are largely indifferent to the
fate of Europe.
Our ancestors saved Europe. Our ancestors stormed beaches in Normandy,
paratrooped into Europe, liberated concentration camps. Our ancestors sacrificed blood and treasure for Europe.
It turned Germany from one of history’s worst despotic states into a
global economic power and a democracy.
We were there at the Berlin airlift.
We were there for the Marshall Plan.
And now Europe is saying:
It is clear that the Americans, at least this
part of the Americans, this administration,
are largely indifferent to the fate of Europe.
That is not true. That is not true.
And as long as I have breath in my
body and blood in my veins, I will join
with the other people on both sides of
the aisle—God bless you, ROGER
WICKER—for standing with the understanding that America is the strongest
Nation in the world, but our strength is
multiplied and magnified when we
stand with our allies, from Germany to
Japan, from Australia to Iceland; that
when our country stands up, we don’t
bully our neighbors like Canada. We
don’t threaten our allies like Iceland,
like Greenland. We don’t threaten
smaller, weaker nations like Panama.
We don’t upend the world order.
Donald Trump does not speak for me.
He does not speak for the traditions of
this body. He doesn’t speak for the people that are buried—Americans that
are buried in fields in Germany and in
France and all over Europe.
Here is former Secretary of Defense
Lloyd Austin’s speech to NATO and the
Atlantic Council.
On April 4, 1949 . . . 12 democracies came
together in the wake of two world wars and
at the dawn of a new Cold War. They all remembered, as President Truman put it, ‘‘the
sickening blow of unprovoked aggression.’’
That is what Truman said. They were
coming together against the sickening
blow of unprovoked aggression.
Do you hear that, Putin?
So they vowed to stand together for their
collective defense and to safeguard freedom
and democracy across Europe and North
America. They made a solemn commitment,
declaring that an armed attack against one
ally would be considered ‘‘an attack against
them all.’’
Now that commitment was enshrined in
Article Five of the North Atlantic Treaty. It
was the foundation of NATO. And it still is.
On that bedrock, we have built the strongest and most successful defensive alliance in
human history.
And, I will say, one of the most prosperous blocs of democratic countries.
Throughout the Cold War, NATO deterred
Soviet aggression against Western Europe—
and prevented a third world war. In the 1990s,
NATO used air power to stop ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
Kosovo. And the day after September 11,
2001, when al-Qaeda terrorists attacked our
country, including slamming a plane into
the Pentagon—
Not far from here—
NATO invoked Article Five for the first and
only time in its history.
Mr. COONS. Will the Senator yield
for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question.
While retaining the floor, I yield to one
of my best friends in the Senate. I yield
to one of the smartest guys I know. I
yield to the guy who handed me the
chairmanship of the committee that
oversaw world public health and Africa
and still reminds me that he knows
more Swahili than I will ever know.
I yield to the guy who when he
speaks up in the Senate, people on both
sides of the aisle listen. I yield to my
friend who has real friendships, who
when I came to him and said: We are
seeing the worst famines on the planet
Earth; that Joe Biden didn’t put
enough money into the World Food
Programme, he went to another appropriator over there, another friend of
ours, LINDSEY GRAHAM, and together
we got billions of dollars of more that
saved hundreds of thousands of lives.
You are a prince of a man. You are
my friend. You are somebody that is a
hero, who folks don’t know their name
and the countries that you have affected with your strength on foreign
policy.
Dear God, my friend, I yield the floor
for a question, while retaining the
floor. Excuse me. I want to say that
correctly. I yield for a question while
retaining the floor. I do not yield the
floor.
Mr. COONS. I ask my friend and colleague from New Jersey if he is familiar with Psalm 30:5.
Mr. BOOKER. Not at this moment.
Mr. COONS. And if not, I offer to repeat it because I think it speaks to this
moment.
Weeping may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning.
Now, this is a holy month. It is the
month of Lent. It is the month of
Ramadan. It is the period of reflection
preceding Passover. And my question
to my colleague is rooted in a scripture
in the Psalms known to both of us, one
widely engaged in, in these days:
Weeping may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning.
This is a reminder both of the possibility of redemption, of the urgency of
hope, and of your nightlong sacrifice
on this floor.
Let me ask, if I might, two more
questions of my friend and colleague.
To my colleague from New Jersey: Are
you familiar with a front-page story on
the Washington Post entitled ‘‘Trump’s
USAID cuts cripple American response
to Myanmar earthquake,’’ an article
running today in the Washington Post?
Mr. BOOKER. I have not read the
paper this day.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00061 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.149 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2022 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Mr. COONS. I had suspected that that
might be the case, given that my colleague from New Jersey has dedicated
his night to standing tall and fighting
hard to make sure that the people of
the United States know what is going
on.
I will share with you, just for a moment, that it hurt my heart to watch
the national evening news last night
and see a Chinese humanitarian emergency response team celebrated as they
pulled survivors out of the earthquake
rubble in Myanmar. It did not hurt my
heart that there are Chinese nationals
providing emergency relief, but it hurt
my heart that exactly those people
who are the very best in the world at
responding to humanitarian crisis, exactly those people had just received
termination letters and their work
with USAID had just been suspended.
Normally, in every humanitarian crisis I have known in my lifetime, the
first in are the men and women of
USAID and the U.S. Armed Forces.
Whether a tsunami, a tornado,
wildfires, or an earthquake, we had
world-leading humanitarian response
capabilities.
And I think it is a tragedy—and it is
reflected in both this article that I
have asked my colleague about and in
the response of the world—that we
have created an enormous opening for
the PRC to come in and do what we
previously did so well.
Let me ask another question, if I
might, of my colleague: Are you familiar with what has just happened to food
banks all over our Nation in terms of
an announcement about impending deliveries of badly needed surplus food?
This, I suspect, will be the focus of
your future comments on agriculture,
but I mention it as something that has
impacted my State and, I suspect,
yours as well.
Mr. BOOKER. First of all, I want to
say this is when, when you ask me a
question—to yield for a question—I
want to say I yield for a question while
retaining the floor, and I want to say
to my colleague, I am familiar with
some of this, but I—if as a part of a
question to me and not anything resembling a colloquy, I will yield for a
question while retaining the floor if
you have another question.
(Mr. MORENO assumed the Chair.)
To my colleague, are you familiar
with an article ‘‘USDA halts millions
of dollars worth of deliveries to food
banks’’?
Mr. BOOKER. I pretty sure I am. I
am.
Mr. COONS. I will simply, then, ask
my colleague a question.
Mr. BOOKER. Therefore, if you are
going to ask me a question, I yield for
a question while retaining the floor.
Mr. COONS. To my colleague, I ask
the question: Are you familiar with the
cuts that have been imposed on the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, suspending hundreds of millions of meals
to Americans in need and the justification for that being offered?
Mr. BOOKER. I am familiar. I have
mentioned it earlier in these last 15
hours, so thank you.
Mr. COONS. Last question.
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Mr. COONS. To my colleague from
New Jersey, I ask the question: Are
you familiar with when, whether, and
why NATO has invoked article 4 and
how the service and the sacrifice that
followed reinforces exactly the point I
believe my colleague was beginning to
speak to, which is the common cause
and the common purpose shown by all
of our NATO allies in America’s greatest moment of need in recent decades
after the attacks of 9/11?
Mr. BOOKER. I am very familiar
with that. It haunts me that when
America was in crisis—I live 11 miles
from Ground Zero.
Mr. COONS. To my colleague, are
you aware which of our European
NATO allies lost per capita the highest
number of their soldiers in combat
serving alongside American servicemembers, a nation I visited, a nation
whose servicemembers I visited, a nation that is today aggrieved by comments made recently? Are you familiar
with our trusted ally Denmark?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I am. That country that has shed more blood than any
of our allies, side-by-side, fighting with
America is Canada—is Canada.
Mr. COONS. Denmark.
Mr. BOOKER. Oh, it is Denmark.
Mr. COONS. Denmark lost per capita,
I believe—excuse me. Let me simply
ask of my colleague one more question.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you very much.
I yield for a question while retaining
the floor.
Mr. COONS. Is my colleague aware
that broadly distributed across our
NATO allies is service and sacrifice, including the loss of their troops in combat and that every single loss in combat was a loss of great service and sacrifice by our NATO allies?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I am familiar.
And I am grateful for your making
those points.
As we threaten Greenland, Denmark
tried to bully them in a way that—with
rhetoric that fashions more after the
behavior of Vladimir Putin’s threatening before the Ukrainian invasion, as
opposed to what allies do who are
grateful for shared sacrifice, who are
grateful for shared honor, who are
grateful for shared prosperity.
What is happening right now, to me,
is shameful. How we are treating our
allies is unacceptable. And the tariffs
that will be imposed will indeed hurt
Canada and other NATO allies, but
they will hurt us in the long run more,
not only with the immediacy of the
driving up of prices for Americans, but
what the President is doing as he turns
his back on Republican traditions and
Democratic traditions, it is going to
hurt us more as a nation in the long
run as other countries look to other
places for leadership of the free world.
Mr. COONS. Will my colleague yield
for another question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Mr. COONS. Is my colleague familiar
with the testimony of Gen. Jim Mattis,
a decorated four-star Marine Corps
general who served as Secretary of Defense in the previous Trump administration who testified about what the
consequences would be if we were to
defund development and diplomacy?
Mr. BOOKER. I hope that the colleague of mine who, again, has been a
mentor, a friend on all they things foreign policy, my belief is that he is referring to when General Mattis sat before the United States Senate and said
very pointedly: If you cut the foreign
aid, if you cut organizations like
USAID, if you cut programs in the
State Department, then buy me more
bullets.
Mr. COONS. Will my colleague yield
for a final question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Mr. COONS. Does my colleague have
an opinion about whether it strengthens or harms America in our national
security to have an earned reputation
as a nation of compassion, a nation
that comes to the aid of those suffering
through humanitarian disasters, a nation of compassion that provides
healthcare and access for retirement in
decency, a nation that cares for the
least of these on the margins of the
world and that has a just and inclusive
society at home? Does my colleague
have an opinion about whether it
strengthens or weakens our Nation at
home and abroad to earn a reputation
for compassion and reliability or instead to deserve a reputation for
unreliability and cruelty?
Mr. BOOKER. So this is the powerful
thing about my friend whom I went
with on my first trip to the continent
of Africa as a Senator, and I remember
flying into Zimbabwe. The leader of
that country had passed away, and you
always correct me on my pronunciation so I am going to try my best pronunciation—Mnangagwa.
Mr. COONS. Mnangagwa.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you, sir.
The alligator was his reputation—
had taken over as his leadership. And
we, this bipartisan merry group of Senators were going there to sit there in a
unified, bipartisan way and say to this
new leader: You need to honor democratic principles. You need to honor
free and fair elections, that we want to
be your partner, we want to be your
friend, but it is time for a new peaceful
democratic Zimbabwe.
And as we landed—I don’t know if
you remember—he was landing, too, in
the airport. And he was coming from
China. He was coming from China
which has different values than we
have.
In fact, you and I both see now all
over the continent of Africa a competition. We come with USAID. We come
with PEPFAR. We come with a program called AGOA, helping with economic development. We come with scientists that stand in the breach
against the worst infectious diseases.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00062 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.150 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2023
One of the most courageous things I
saw CHRIS COONS do in my life was
when the Ebola scare was happening 8
years ago and was starting to show up
on our shores, you did something that
people were afraid to do.
You went to Africa to visit with the
people from our country that are there
fighting Ebola. You had to come and
quarantine when you came back to
make sure you didn’t have it. It was
amazing because you were going there
to say to the world, I, CHRIS COONS,
Senator from Delaware, is here, but
America is here. America knows that
an infectious disease anywhere is a
threat to public health everywhere.
America knows that when it comes to
the globe, Martin Luther King was
right in his spiritual proclamation in
the ‘‘Letter from the Birmingham
Jail’’ that we are all caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a
common garment of destiny, that injustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere.
I have been to where you have been,
Kenya to Tanzania, traveling with you
to Ouagadougou. You used to make me
smile when I used to say the capital of
Burkina Faso. Ouagadougou, my
friend.
There is a word I learned from a language, the Bantu language. It basically
roughly translates into this:
I am because we are. I am because we are.
America has learned the power of
soft power. General Mattis knew much
cheaper investment, much more success, string of successes we have had in
the last 25 years have been with our
soft power, not with our 20-year wars in
places like Iraq and Afghanistan.
General Mattis knew that. He gave
wisdom. He said: Do not cut the State
Department. Do not cut USAID. They
are making an invaluable contribution
to fighting terrorism, to fighting instability, to spreading democracy, to
fighting infectious diseases when we go
and stand.
But now, we are shrinking. We are retreating. We are pulling back. We are
cutting aid. And when crises are happening like we are seeing in Myanmar
right now, we don’t even have the personnel to be there to help people. But
you know who does? China. And they
show up, and they leverage influence—
you and I know this—to the continent
of Africa. Here, take our money, take
our money. Be in debt to us now. We
have control. By the way, we want a
military port here like they have right
next to us in Djibouti. The Chinese are
playing the long game, and Trump is
playing into their hands and weakening our Nation, not just against infectious diseases, not just against the
global fight against climate change,
not just against the economic opportunities that we are missing out in the
Continent of Africa.
Guess what, if you don’t know this:
By 2050, one out of every four people on
the planet Earth will live on the continent of Africa. One of three workingage people on the planet Earth will be
on the continent of Africa. China is
playing the long game, not only critical rare earth minerals but the economic power of the most populous continent on the planet.
And what are we doing with Trump?
We are doing the Michael Jackson. We
are moonwalking away from that continent, saying: China, go ahead.
I love you CHRIS COONS. I am the
ranking member of this subcommittee
inspired by you, CHRIS COONS, and the
work that you and me and LINDSAY
GRAHAM and John McCain did over the
last 10 years is being swept away as our
allies are saying frightening things;
that they have to look elsewhere for
leadership and not to the people who
saved the free world.
It is a shame what we are doing to
my grandparents’ generation, with my
grandmother with her war bonds and
her victory garden and my grandfather
building bombers at the Willow Run
bomber plant in Michigan. All the
country came together and sacrificed
for the war effort.
We saved Europe. We bled and died on
that European Continent. There are—
and you have seen them—these fields of
crosses and you see some Stars of
David and you see some Muslim graves.
You see it all.
Our American boys died. And yet we
still invested in that continent. We
still invested with the Marshall Plan.
We still invested with the Berlin Airlift. We still stood up to communism.
And a great Republican President—a
great Republican President—who stood
up in front of a Russian autocratic
leader and said: Gorbachev, tear down
this wall.
And what is Trump going to be remembered for? I really love Vladimir
Putin. Zelenskyy is a dictator. You are
my friend.
You and I both visit VA halls, and occasionally, we meet a World War II veteran. In my State, there are some incredible men that still wear their hat.
If they can, they stand with pride.
They are called the ‘‘greatest generation.’’
And what are we doing to their legacy? What are we doing to their legacy,
CHRIS COONS?
I am going to keep talking unless
somebody wants to say: Will the Senator yield for a question?
Mr. MARKEY. Will the Senator yield
for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Mr. MARKEY. First of all, thank you
so much for what you are doing, Senator BOOKER. You are drawing our Nation’s attention to what Donald Trump
and Elon Musk and DOGE are seeking
to do to our country, especially the
most vulnerable in our society.
You, Senator BOOKER, you have been
a champion for the poor, for the sick,
for the disabled, for those most in need
throughout your entire life. That is
who you are. You are absolutely a
champion for those who need help the
most.
So as we look at what Donald Trump
is proposing, to destroy the Department of Education, just to level it,
knowing that title I money goes to the
poorest children in Newark, in Boston,
so that they can have as close to an
equal footing as is possible so they,
too, can compete to ensure they enjoy
the American dream.
To dock Medicaid, knowing that
there are 338,000 people just in Massachusetts alone who are on disabilities,
who need Medicaid in order to deal
with those afflictions, which their families need a little bit of help to deal
with, to begin a process of saying that
Social Security is a Ponzi scheme and
knowing that, ultimately, they need
the billions of dollars for their tax
breaks for millionaires and billionaires, and they have to get it out of
education. They have to get it out of
Medicaid. They have to get it out of
veterans’ benefits. They have to get it
out of Social Security.
We know what the plot is. The plot is
to get $2 trillion out of programs that
affect ordinary people in order to have
tax breaks for the wealthiest people in
our Nation. And most of it will come
out of healthcare. It will come out of
Medicaid, ultimately, out of Medicare,
out of the Affordable Care Act, out of
veterans’ benefits—healthcare,
healthcare, healthcare, healthcare for
every family, for the wealthiest in our
society who don’t need a tax break.
The one thing they don’t need right
now is a tax break, especially when
Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos and Mark
Zuckerberg now control more wealth
than the bottom 50 percent of our Nation combined. Do they really need a
tax break? I mean, I know the President put them right behind him at his
inauguration, but oh my God, the Cabinet sits behind billionaires? The
Founding Fathers are spinning in their
graves thinking about how they have
perverted what is supposed to be the
way in which our government, our
country works.
So I thank you for your incredible
leadership. You are putting the spotlight on what is going wrong in this
country right now, this oligarchy seeking to take over our Nation.
So I thank the Senator for what he is
doing, and he is just so consistent with
his whole life, what he stands for. What
he stands for on this on the floor of the
Senate today is a conscience—a conscience for the Nation.
Can the Senator tell the Senate
today—the Nation—what does it mean
if we continue down this path of Donald Trump and Elon Musk and DOGE
for those families who need help the
most in our society?
Mr. BOOKER. I so appreciate the
Senator, and I want to tell folks that
when I wrote my book, I thought I
knew this man here. I did a lot about
environmental justice in my book. I
did a lot about these toxic chemicals
out there that are threatening our people.
I came to the office of the Senate one
day so humbled because I told him: I
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00063 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.151 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2024 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
knew you as my colleague. We both got
here around the same time. But I had
no idea of the kinds of things you did
in the U.S. House of Representatives,
how many bills that made a difference
in people’s lives in Boston, in Newark,
in Camden, in Passaic. You are one of
the people that, after a few years here,
I discovered in 2015, writing my book,
how amazing your career is. And now
having served in the Senate about the
same amount of time, I am so grateful
for you.
You have been so consistent in why
you came here, not forgetting the people you have been fighting for for your
whole career. So your question is right
aligned with that point.
It was said earlier about things that
humanity’s biggest fight, humanity’s
biggest consistent theme is us versus
them or just us. I don’t like when you
pit one group in this country against
another group. It is not us versus the
billionaires or us versus the Republicans; it is understanding what is best
for ‘‘we the people.’’ How can we create
a more perfect Union?
I will tell you this right now, we are
a Union in trouble. Compared to our
global peers, we have higher disease
rates, higher diabetes rates, higher
cancer rates, higher maternal mortality rates, higher premature birth
rates, and higher infant mortality
rates.
There are so many things going on in
this country that should not go on. But
yet we are a nation of utter abundance.
We are a nation of incredible wealth
and resources, and we have proven in
our past to be a nation of incredible vision. That is why I don’t understand
why we are playing so small, why we
have a President that is playing so
small. It is not coming here like Presidents of the past and saying ‘‘We together,’’ from Reagan, to Clinton, to
Obama. There is a big challenge, America, and we together are going to get
into the room and do sausage making,
Republicans and Democrats, and we are
going to find a way to write great legislation.
Whatever you want to say about Joe
Biden, he was a big President because
he didn’t try to do things by Executive
fiat or this quote of Donald Trump’s I
put here, ‘‘the primacy of the Executive,’’ ignoring our Constitution.
Do you know how many bipartisan
bills were hammered out here? I see another dear friend of mine, MARK WARNER. Do you know how many bipartisan
bills MARK WARNER was at the table
for, my senior Senator who was chairman of Intelligence? We did a bipartisan infrastructure act when Trump,
in his first term, had infrastructure
week every other week. We did a Chips
and Science bill. He is trying to claw
back the money. But we, together—I
still remember that classified SCIF
where the whole Senate was there and
our national security team, and Gina
Raimondo put forward the crisis in our
country, the vulnerabilities, and we
came out of that room, we got into our
rooms, and we hammered out a great
Chips and Science bill.
Decades went by in this body with
doing nothing on gun violence—decades. Courageous people on the Republican side, friends of mine that surprised me that stood up—like Senator
CORNYN—and said: We are going to do
something. I have my lines, you have
your lines, but let’s find space in the
middle.
We did programs. If you come to New
Jersey, the community violence intervention money is lowering murder
rates in places like Newark by over 50
percent and helping to get it done,
along with our great law enforcement
officers.
The incredible thing about that now
is Trump is trying to claw back that
money, violating the separation of
powers because we decide how we are
spending money in America, not the
Executive. Read the Constitution.
So you and I both know that a big
President would come here and say:
Let’s do some legislation.
But John McCain—and I read it in
the middle of the night—but John
McCain—it is really important—John
McCain—I won’t read it, but I will tell
it—voted against the healthcare last
time, the taking away of healthcare
from millions of Americans, and said
that it is because of the dysfunction of
this body that we don’t come together
and do something bigger and bolder to
provide better healthcare, to bring the
ideas from both sides and expand the
opportunities for Americans and replace the imperfections of the Affordable Care Act with smarter and better
things.
Not Donald Trump. He is repeating—
why?—the mistakes, but not with the
ACA, which affects tens of millions of
Americans, with Medicaid, which affects 70 to 100 million Americans. Why?
You ask why. Well, we know why.
There are two things that this will
achieve—two things. One, as you said,
it is because he wants to not just renew
the Trump tax cuts but expand them to
have disproportionate benefits to the
wealthiest.
I wish the wealthiest in the country,
names that we know, people like Elon
Musk, would say: I don’t want a tax
cut. I wish he would say the truth: I
don’t need a tax cut.
But that is one of the reasons. He
wants to renew a program that gave
disproportionate money. But that is
not the only reason. There is a cruelty
in what he is doing. It is so offensive.
He seems to have no respect for people
with disabilities. He made fun of a
journalist with a disability once. He
seems to have no respect for people
who are working hard and struggling
but still can’t make ends meet, no respect for people that are afraid of his
language, of his threats. They think
that what he is doing to Social Security might mean they don’t have it.
What he is saying about Medicare
and Medicaid are lies. He has more registered lies than any President of my
lifetime. They don’t think they can
trust this President not to hurt them
because he already is.
I was told by my parents that what
defines you as a person is not what
happens to you but how you choose to
respond.
What happens to us as a nation is not
what defines us. They can bomb us at
Pearl Harbor and attack us on 9/11. The
American character was defined by
how we responded to those crises. Yes,
there have been major political crises
before, but we responded by bending
the arc of our Nation more towards justice, taking care of more and more people, saying that we belong to each
other in America. It is ‘‘we the people.’’ It is ‘‘we the people.’’
I see the standing of my friend MARK
WARNER. I don’t know if he has a question, but I know what I am told to say
if he asks me to yield for a question.
Mr. WARNER. Will the Senator yield
for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, if I
may join my friend and colleague from
Massachusetts, one, to celebrate the
Senator from New Jersey’s endurance,
his willingness to continue to make his
case in as clear terms as possible.
Not having been here last night at
6:30, I do wonder, when he started this
speech-a-thon at 6:30, whether the bob
and the weave and the move were quite
as strong or was he firmly attached to
the podium.
The fact that you are going on more
than 12 hours now and you look like
you have hours ahead and hours before
you sleep and knowing that there are
other Members who have a question,
including the majority leader, I just
want to be brief with mine.
You have talked a lot with great passion about the damage done domestically. As chairman of the Intelligence
Committee and now vice chairman, I
have been aghast at the sloppiness of
this administration time after time
after time in terms of their treatment
of classified information.
In the first 2 weeks of the administration, strangely, a couple hundred
CIA agents’ identities were revealed on
a nonclassified chain. These probationary employees, these new employees—the American Government had
spent a couple hundred thousand dollars on each of them. You have to get
a security clearance. You have to get
them trained. Unfortunately, these
folks can’t deploy abroad. They can’t
deploy undercover because their names
were carelessly put on an unsecured
channel.
You say, well, that was just a one-off.
Well, what about a week or so later?
The DOGE boys print a whole list of
Federal properties that should be for
sale. They quickly take it down a few
hours later, realizing they once again
have screwed up. But in putting up
that list, they put on classified dark
sites that the American Government,
again, spends millions of dollars to protect.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00064 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.153 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2025
More recently as well, the DOGE
boys, either ignorantly or maliciously,
either one—just plain stupid—put out
the list of a classified Agency, its budget, total head count—again, all classified information.
Senator, one thing I can tell you, and
I know you know this as well, if this
had happened to a line intelligence officer or a line military officer, there
would be no question—your butt would
be fired.
As a matter of fact, we got information yesterday that there had been a
DHS employee who had inadvertently—
inadvertently—put a journalist on a
chatline. Guess what happened. The
guy was fired.
So when it came to this incident now
called Signalgate or the Signalgate fiasco, where you have the leading members of this administration debating
where and how we should bomb the
Houthis, including specific information
of who will be hit and when, I was—
Senator BOOKER, I was down in Hampton Roads this week, and these were
the communities that surround the
Norfolk Naval Station. The Norfolk
Naval Station is where the Truman,
the aircraft carrier, has been deployed
from. It is the aircraft carrier that the
flights that attacked the Houthis flew
off of.
I can tell you one thing, Senator
BOOKER: These people were pissed off
that there had been this level of carelessness about their loved ones, that if
it had gotten in the wrong hands, it
would have cost American lives.
So, Senator BOOKER, as you put down
the litanies of all of the challenges
that have been raised by this administration, I will ask you a simple question: Do you agree that this pattern—
not a one-off—
Mr. BOOKER. Yes.
Mr. WARNER.—this pattern of sloppiness endangers our national security?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes. Absolutely, yes.
I love that you gave that litany, Senator.
I benefited from your leadership on
the Intel Committee. You are one of
the people that—when things go down
on planet Earth, you are one of the
small handful of people with the highest security clearance here. You know
before rank-and-file Senators do. We
have had so many conversations about
threat matrices and what our enemies
are doing. You have sent me to the
SCIF and said ‘‘I can’t talk to you
about this; go down to the SCIF and
ask for the information’’ and helped me
to fill out my understanding of national security.
But I am stunned by this President.
All that I have read in the SCIF about
what Russia is doing to this country—
I am stunned and angry at this President and what he is doing to us by
cozying up to Putin and turning his
back on our allies.
But the sloppiness, the unqualified
leaders that he has put in place—it has
caused us to be more at risk. And
Signalgate—you said it. If that had
happened under any other President,
Republican or Democrat, whoever controlled the Senate would have hearings. They would want to know: Was
this pattern and practice? Did these
Signal conversations happen before and
we only know about this one because
somehow you pulled in a journalist?
Well, that is a violation of the law
because their disappearing messages
were destroying government documents that the executive branch has a
legal obligation to keep. And classified
materials—putting it out there saying
there was nothing classified about
that, lying, then they put up the actual—if there is nothing classified,
then release the whole thing.
To the wisdom of people like you—
again, more wisdom and experience at
intel than me—it is clear that was sensitive, probably classified. But we
should be having hearings and accountability.
I keep going back to how this document is being undermined and attacked
by this President. And one of the powers and responsibilities that we swore
to uphold—every one of us swore to uphold that we are to be a check on the
administration.
Before I yield to the next question
from Senator SCHUMER, I want to talk
about Senator SCHUMER. I want to say
something and get it off my chest.
Senator MURPHY, we passed the 15-
hour mark. I want to thank Senator
MURPHY in particular because he has
been with me the whole night. He
hasn’t left my side. In some ways, that
repaid the 15 hours because we called
CHUCK SCHUMER 9 years ago—9 years
ago. I remember exactly where we were
standing when the three of us were on
the phone. We asked CHUCK to help us,
for you to take the floor right down
there and do a filibuster. We didn’t
know how long it was going to last. I
committed to you I would be your aidede-camp. And 15 hours you stood, CHRIS
MURPHY, saying this Nation shouldn’t
do business as usual for the Postmaster. The leader of the Senate, 9
years ago, said, ‘‘I support you guys.
Go ahead.’’
So one of the first people I called was
Senator SCHUMER and talked to about
this—actually, it was Murphy. He did
full circle for me and has been with me
the whole 15 hours. The debt is paid,
but I have fuel in the tank, man. The
only reason you stopped wasn’t because
you couldn’t go on anymore. We got a
concession from MITCH MCCONNELL. We
got a concession to get two votes on
commonsense gun safety that Republicans had put forward, like universal
background checks in the past. But we
lost that vote. On both occasions, 9
years apart, once when MURPHY was
the principal and now here, we had a
leader who said: Yes, how can I help?
I want to thank Senator SCHUMER before, I suspect, he might ask and yield
for a question, for being a friend, a
partner, and one of the first people I
turned to with this idea and encouraged me to go for it. ‘‘Go for it, CORY.’’
Thank you, CHUCK SCHUMER.
Mr. SCHUMER. Would the Senator
yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Mr. SCHUMER. I have two questions,
frankly, one on Medicaid cuts, which
we talked about last night, and one on
tariffs.
First, let me say before I get to this
question that your strength, your fortitude, your clarity has just been nothing short of amazing. And all of America is paying attention to what you are
saying. All of America needs to know
there are so many problems because of
the disastrous actions of this administration in terms of how they are helping only the billionaires and hurting
average families.
You have brought that forth with
such clarity. People from one end of
America to the other admire you. Our
whole caucus is behind you. And we admire your stamina, your strength, your
passion, your intelligence. The list of
adjectives could go on.
My first question relates to the Medicaid cuts. As we talked about last
night, I visited three Republican districts—one in Staten Island, one right
on the border of two Republican districts in Long Island—yesterday to
talk about Medicaid cuts. I went to
nursing homes. It was clear that the
Medicaid cuts that are proposed in this
proposal—$880 billion in the House—
would be devastating.
On Staten Island, the nursing home
we visited—they love it, Silver Lake
nursing home—would close. Three hundred people would lose their jobs; hundreds would be thrown out. And most
of them said their children can’t take
care of them. It is too—their needs are
more advanced. Even some who said
their children might be able to take
care of them didn’t have room in the
house, et cetera. So it is affecting Staten Island, middle class, voted for
Trump.
But we made a plea to their congresswoman to not vote for any bill that
had these Medicaid cuts in the tax
breaks for billionaires. A lot of the people there were—it was bipartisan, both
parties there. We estimated that about
18,000 people total would lose their jobs
with these Medicaid cuts, creating a recession on Staten Island. We estimated
the harm that it would cause. So this
was devastating.
Same thing on Long Island. Again,
Republican areas with Republican Congress people who hold the balance. If
those three Congress people alone
would say: I am not voting for a bill
that cuts Medicaid to give tax breaks
for the billionaires, the bill would fail.
I know that you in New Jersey and
my colleagues in Massachusetts, Connecticut, and elsewhere are doing the
same thing, Congressmen and Senators. I talked to Leader JEFFRIES. He
is doing the same with his folks.
So my question to you is very simple.
If these people in New Jersey, in New
York, across America are kicked out of
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00065 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.154 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2026 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
nursing homes and assisted living facilities and healthcare facilities, what
would they do? How could they—and
how does the Senator, with his passion
and everything else, feel when the only
reason they are doing this is to give
tax breaks to the wealthiest of Americans?
Would you please answer my question, sir?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I will, Leader
SCHUMER. Earlier, or late last night,
rather, I read dozens and dozens and
dozens of letters from terrified people.
The stories were heartbreaking as people rendered their pride and gave us insights into the more painful aspects of
their lives.
I got emotional over one about a person talking about being diagnosed with
Parkinson’s and knowing the disease
would be more and more debilitating,
like I saw with my father, and demand
more and more help. And she was paranoid that the burden on her family,
they couldn’t afford it.
I had these amazing—this one amazing letter about a person who said they
were in a sandwich generation—two 90-
something-year-old parents they were
taking care of and two adult men—
children—with disabilities. For all
these people, like you saw in the nursing homes, Medicaid wasn’t a plus or
some kind of abundance heaped upon
their lives. It helps them keep the fragile financial world they were living in
stable. And it is not just the $880 billion cuts, Senator SCHUMER. Half of
that or a quarter of that would cut
services that would pull apart their
whole lives—their ability to care for
their loved ones, their ability to still
work.
One person just said the transportation we get through Medicaid for my
disabled child is the link that holds it
all together. And callously and cruelly,
they are talking about this, not in any
kind of insightful way, not in any kind
of ‘‘here is how we can make it more
efficient and help keep it.’’ There is
none of that thought or logic, bringing
in experts because we read page after
page after page from rural hospital
leaders, of urban hospital leaders and
more and more.
Your question is clearly that it is
this crazy scheme right now to expand
the Trump tax cuts that overwhelmingly disproportionately go to the
wealthiest of us in America who need
not our help; that would still yet expand the deficit by trillions of dollars,
which means your children—and I
know how proud a grandfather you
are—your grandchildren would have to
pay for that debt. They are stealing
from your grandchildren so that the
wealthiest amongst us could get bigger
tax cuts and, at the same time, taking
away medical coverage from the most
vulnerable.
What is that? It is not who we are. It
is not who we are, America.
And as much as people—thousands
depended on us to save the ACA—Medicaid affects millions and millions of
more people. Wake up. They are coming after a vital program for American
expectant mothers, for American children, for American disabled, for seniors
like the ones you visited.
I have one more thing to get off my
chest, sir. This is a little lighter. You
heaped so many kind things on me, I
don’t know if you realize that never before in the history of America has a
man from Brooklyn said so many complimentary things about a man from
Newark.
Mr. SCHUMER. I would remind my
colleague that we are both New York
Giants fans.
Mr. BOOKER. Who play where? In
New Jersey. This is not a colloquy. I
hold the floor. I do not yield. Brooklyn
stole the Nets—it is an injustice—from
Newark. They stole the Nets. I do not
yield the floor for a rebuttal. And the
Giants and the Jets play in New Jersey. There is only one football team in
New York, and that is the Bills.
I do not yield, but I do love and respect you. When I have the floor, I
don’t have to yield. The one time in my
life I get the last word with my much
more senior, much wiser friend and
Senator.
Mr. SCHUMER. My colleague, I do
have another question on an unrelated
subject.
Mr. BOOKER. OK, unrelated. As long
as you give me that commitment, I
yield for a question while retaining the
floor.
Mr. SCHUMER. First, let me say before I ask my question, Go Bills. Second, given the 15 hours which you have
shown such amazing strength of an allAmerican athlete who could probably,
given what you have shown tonight, be
a star on our Giants—so I will not even
try to rebut where the Giants are.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you.
Mr. SCHUMER. I will ask this question. Going back—before I get to tariffs—one of the leading hospitals in
New York told me if there were only a
20-percent cut of Medicaid, less steep
than they show, that they would close.
They are the only cancer care place in
the Bronx, 1.3 million people, and they
give great care. They are the only ones.
They would close.
So the devastation of these cuts, the
American people should realize, is just
enormous from one end of the country
to the other—middle-class communities and upper middle-class communities like Long Island, middle-class
like Staten Island, and poor communities like the Bronx.
On tariffs, let me ask a question. So
here we are, right on the edge of April
2. Today is April Fool’s Day, but the
tariffs the President is proposing, unfortunately, are not part of an April
Fool’s trick. They are real, and they
are devastating. My question to my
colleague is: With these tariffs, which
is estimated would cost the American
families $6,000 more on average, would
raise costs on everything across the
board, and would throw devastation
into our economy—look at the stock
market. It goes down when Trump is
serious about tariffs, then goes up
when he says maybe he is not so serious. And with the chaos that it has
caused so businesses which love certainty—small businesses, medium-sized
businesses, large businesses need certainty.
So my questions are these. Does the
great Senator and great Giants’ fan
from Newark agree that prices could go
way up, all the way up to as much as
$6,000? And does he agree that the
chaos from Trump’s tariffs is discombobulating the economy in very serious ways? And, again, does he agree
that the reason they seem to be doing
this, they count the revenues. This guy
Navarro seems to have no sense of reality, yet he seems to be in charge. And
they count the revenues to help them
get more tax cuts for the wealthy.
Almost everything they do, including
tariffs, it seems to me, is aimed at getting those tax cuts for the wealthy.
God bless the wealthy, as I heard you
say last night when we spoke. We are
not against people who make a lot of
money. God bless them, but they don’t
need a tax break.
Mr. BOOKER. No, they don’t.
Mr. SCHUMER. They should realize
the beauty of America helped them become or stay billionaires. The money
we invested in education and roads and
schools and helping kids get food
makes a better workforce.
So my question to my colleague on
these tariffs, A, does he agree that it
could raise the price on an average
family thousands of dollars—it is estimated $6,000. Does he agree that the
chaos caused by Trump’s on-again, offagain, this-country, that-country, thismuch, that-much, this-product, thatproduct is hurting the economy and
hurting business people doing their
jobs? And does he agree that it seems
the motivation is tax breaks for the
wealthiest people?
Will you please answer my question?
I yield back to the Senator from New
Jersey.
Mr. BOOKER. I will.
So you and I both know that in 72
days now—it is the next day—that of
the 72 days that Trump has been in office, he has caused havoc on the American economy, especially given the
economy he inherited. Inflation is up.
Prices are up. Consumer confidence is
down. The stock market and people’s
401(k)s—their retirement plans—are
down. He continues to do things to rattle confidence, to raise prices, and to
hurt not the billionaires—the people
who can afford these things—but to
hurt average Americans, who find
housing prices too high and difficult to
make ends meet.
Every time—and I have looked at the
tariffs throughout history. In fact, one
of my friends sent me this really funny
clip I hope somebody will put up for me
from, I think it was ‘‘Ferris Bueller’s
Day Off’’ where he was talking about
tariffs and was like ‘‘Bueller!
Bueller!’’—or maybe it was another
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00066 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.155 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2027
movie. I am mixing it up. It shows
my—
Mr. SCHUMER. You are entitled.
Mr. BOOKER. What is that?
Mr. SCHUMER. You are entitled.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you.
But the tariffs haven’t worked out
for Republican Presidents who tried
them during the Depression. The evidence is here. Learn from our history.
Mr. SCHUMER. Sorry. Does my colleague remember the names of Smoot
and Hawley?
Mr. BOOKER. Smoot and Hawley.
Yes, sir, I definitely remember those
names from high school history.
God bless you, Mr. Al Gore and Mr.
Perot.
So, yes, what he is going to do tomorrow is going to rattle the markets.
What he is going to do tomorrow is
raise prices for Americans. What he is
going to do tomorrow is lie to folks and
say this is something that China will
pay or whoever will pay when actually
it is the American consumers who will
pay with higher prices and more economic insecurity.
This man—I will tell you this quote
that Frederick Douglass once said.
This I do remember.
He said:
The limits of tyranny are prescribed by the
endurance of those whom they oppress.
How much more will we take of this?
How much more will we as America say
‘‘Cut our Medicaid to give tax cuts to
the billionaires. Take the Affordable
Care Act, and take away tax credits.
Take away enrollment support. Hey,
come after Social Security. Cut thousands of people. Make customer service
get worse,’’ as said the Wall Street
Journal? How much more of these indignities will we take as he turns our
back on our allies? How much more
will we take—how much more?—of a
person who is doing tyrannical things
as he takes our Constitution and continues to trash it as he is running into
judge after judge after judge who is
trying to stop him? But we have already seen that he wants to ignore
judges or if he gets rulings he doesn’t
like, he trashes the judges, and even
the Chief Justice, appointed by a Republican, says: No, no.
This is not right. This is not who we
are. This is not how we do things in
America.
How much more can we endure before
we in the collective chorus of conviction in our country say: Enough is
enough. Enough is enough. You are not
going to get away with this.
Mr. SCHUMER. I thank the Senator
for his fortitude, his strength, and the
crystalline brilliance by which he has
shown the American people the huge
dangers that face them with this
Trump-DOGE-Musk administration.
I yield the floor back to my colleague
from New Jersey.
Mr. BOOKER. Thank you. Thank
you.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Massachusetts, but I think
you have to ask him to yield for a
question.
Ms. WARREN. Mr. President, will the
Senator yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Ms. WARREN. I am very grateful to
the Senator from New Jersey for coming to the floor for such an extended
period of time to give voice to all of
those around this country whose voices
evidently are not heard by the Republicans in the U.S. Congress.
I wanted to ask a question for the 73
million people who are beneficiaries of
the Social Security System and for
their families—for the people whose
grandmas are getting Social Security,
for the people whose cousins or whose
dads died who were getting Social Security benefits, about what is happening right now between Donald
Trump and Elon Musk, our current coPresidents, and what they are trying to
do to the Social Security System.
So I start this question with just a
basic observation. Social Security is
not charity. It is not something we
give away to those who are less fortunate and we do this out of the goodness
of our hearts. Social Security is a contract that people who work in America
pay into; it is the system for all of
their working lives. When the time
comes that they retire or something
happens to them and they are not able
to do that work, they can count on the
Social Security System and the payments they are legally entitled to. I
want to underscore here ‘‘legally.’’
Now, if America wanted to change
that contract, the place they have to
go is right here, to Congress.
Mr. BOOKER. Yes.
Ms. WARREN. They have to come to
the U.S. Senate or they have to go to
the U.S. House of Representatives, and
they have to say: We actually want to
change benefits for Social Security recipients.
By the way, that has happened dozens and dozens of times in our history,
up through the late 1980s, when we
made adjustments in the Social Security benefits—for example, for the fact
that people lived longer, for the fact
that people worked longer, and so we
made minor adjustments in the system. We also made adjustments to
make sure that there were cost-of-living changes in how much Social Security would pay out.
So anyone who wants to change the
benefits that people are legally entitled to has to come here to Congress
and make that happen.
But it appears that Elon Musk and
Donald Trump have tried to figure out
an end run, and the end run is to say:
OK. We can’t directly change benefits,
but what we can do is we can effectively cut off benefits.
Now, how can they do that? Well, one
way is to fire all the people who help
people get their Social Security benefits. Think of it this way: There is
someone who wants to collect Social
Security. Let’s just say, at age 66, they
decide, ‘‘I am ready. It is time for me
to retire. I can’t do this anymore. I
want to collect my Social Security
benefits,’’ and they try to fill out the
form. It turns out it gets rejected.
There is a number off somewhere in the
system. Somebody has gotten confusion on what the name is or where
somebody worked or an employer from
decades back failed to fill out the right
form, so now there is a problem in the
system.
So what does a person do? Well, first,
they might try calling, but if you fired
the people who answer the phones, that
is not going to work. OK. So what is
the next thing you do? You go to your
local Social Security office. Oh, but if
they close the Social Security office
near you, that is not going to work. So
what do you do? You go to the Social
Security office that you can find that
is 2 hours away, 3 hours away, 4 hours
away. You finally get through to that
Social Security office, and when you
get there, if they have fired most of the
people, you may encounter what? Two
people working the desk to help
straighten out problems and a line that
is 50 people long.
By the way, these come from real
stories. People are telling us what is
happening out there.
So by the time the day is over, our
example here hasn’t even made it to
the front of the line. So he doesn’t get
the question answered. He doesn’t get
the problem resolved. He has to go
back home again and has to find somebody who can maybe take him to the
Social Security office that is hours
away and start this process over and
over and over.
If this person—let’s just say for example it takes 3 months to get this
problem ultimately resolved by the Social Security Administration. They
don’t get the money. That money is
lost. It just simply is gone. They do not
get the money they are legally entitled
to, and they have no right to go back
and collect it, even pointing out that it
was Social Security’s error.
So the failure to correct these errors
or to give people an opportunity to correct these errors is effectively the
same as having cut their benefits.
When you do that for 1 percent of the
people, you drive up your error rate.
When you do that for 5 percent of the
people or when you do that for 10 percent of the folks who are getting Social
Security—and, man, those cuts really
start to add up—they really start to
add up for the people whose benefits
are cut. They really start to add up for
Donald Trump and for Elon Musk.
Let’s look at another possibility
here, and that is just simply delay.
Checks don’t go out on time. When
checks don’t go out on time, then the
promise that people relied on that that
check would come on the 3rd of the
month is what they count on for rent.
That is what they count on to put groceries on the table. That is what they
count on to support themselves. It is
gone.
So maybe he will get the check next
month. Another billionaire Republican,
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00067 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.157 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2028 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Howard Lutnick, said: Don’t worry
about it. His mother-in-law would simply count on the fact that they would
straighten the problem out, and maybe
next month, she would get her payment. I suppose if your son-in-law is a
billionaire, you can count on the fact
that somebody will make sure your
rent gets covered and groceries are on
the table, but for the 70 million Americans who rely on that check coming in
every month, it is not so clear what
you are going to do.
So what do you do? Do you borrow
money to make rent? Do you call on
relatives if you have them? Whom do
you go to to be able to make it to the
end of this month and, if the problem
persists, to the next month and the
next month? Where do you go?
That is, in my view, as much a benefit cut as Congress’s having voted to
say: We are just going to give a 10-percent across-the-board cut to everyone
who receives Social Security benefits.
There are a lot of ways to cut benefits, and breaking your promise to 73
million Americans is a benefit cut. It is
not a legal benefit cut, but it is an effective benefit cut.
I admire the Senator from New Jersey for being here today to speak out
for those Americans who face these
kinds of cuts and have no recourse. I
admire him for standing up and saying
to the Republicans who won’t go do
townhalls and who won’t go out and
meet with these people and listen to
them: Listen to their concerns. Listen
to their fears. Listen to their stories
about what happens as thousands and
thousands more Social Security employees are fired. Correcting problems
and straightening out your benefits
gets harder and more out of reach for
more and more Americans. That is
what we face right now.
So the question that I want to pose
to the Senator from New Jersey is this:
At a time when Donald Trump and
Elon Musk are looking for an indirect
way to cut Social Security benefits—
and let’s just pause here, if I can, to
say, Why?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes.
Ms. WARREN. Why go out of your
way to cut Social Security benefits?
Come on now. There are 73 million
Americans who rely on this. This has
been the backbone of America’s promise to its own people that you did the
work, you put in the money, and now
you are entitled to the benefit on the
other side.
Why are they doing this? Because
they want to reduce the amount of
money that is available for Social Security and instead take that money
over so that they can advance tax cuts
for billionaires and billionaire corporations. They are just trying to grease
the skids here for the billionaires to
get even richer and ask the 73 million
Americans who rely on Social Security
to pay for it out of their own hides.
So the question I have for the Senator from New Jersey is, When Elon
Musk and Donald Trump are determined to try to use a backdoor way to
cut Social Security benefits, A, are
they acting legally, and B, how do we
put a stop to this?
(Mr. SHEEHY assumed the Chair.)
Mr. BOOKER. Amen. Amen.
You know, Reverend WARNOCK was
here earlier and was preaching and
quoting Scripture, but you are preaching the gospel of truth, my friend, from
a civic gospel that speaks to the cares
and the concerns of American hope and
of the American dream and of the
American Constitution, because you
and I both know the answer to the
question.
I have to say, for the folks who are
watching, she is the great Senator
from Massachusetts, but she used to be
a professor in New Jersey.
Ms. WARREN. That is true.
Mr. BOOKER. She was a Rutgers professor. I was listening to her way before I got to the Senate when she was
fighting for the CFPB, when she was
fighting so people would not be taken
advantage of. She established the firstever Agency whose sole purpose was to
stand up to the Big Bs—to big banks,
to big corporate powers—and defend
people. It is an institution that got billions and billions of dollars back into
the pockets of the American consumers.
What did Donald Trump and DOGE
do to an institution that we set up in
Congress in a bipartisan way? They did
something that is against the Constitution. They went after it to hack it to
pieces so that it is no more.
But to add insult to injury, down
here, we just had a vote on overdraft
fees that was stunning to me because
there is just no defense of it. It was a
clear thing.
Some of the big banks said: Do you
know what? We don’t need those usury
fees. It is actually wrong. Those are
the big banks that stood up and did the
right thing. But a handful of others
were still taking advantage of people,
and this Senate got to vote on which
side are we on. And we failed.
So your question is right. You detail
what is right about how people are getting hurt already, how the benefits of
Social Security are already being affected, how rural Social Security offices are being closed already. And the
question is why, under the guise of efficiency, but you are hurting our elders
who deserve dignity in their retirement.
It is stunning to me, Senator WARREN—stunning to me—that we are actually even having this discussion and
having this debate when there has been
not one congressional hearing about
what Elon Musk is doing.
The letters I read earlier about Social Security were painful because people wanted to know what was being
done with their most confidential and
private information.
I want to continue because we were
working through national security.
And given the time, I want to rush to
just read some stories of voices. I wanted to come to the floor and read people’s voices, elevate voices.
So here is a voice, a statement from
Julia Hurley from Bergen County, NJ.
Thank you, Julia. I see you.
My family’s roots are deep in New Jersey,
all the way back to my great-grandparents,
with my mom’s side from Bogota, Fair
Lawn, and Upper Saddle River and my dad’s
side from Spring Lake and Wall Township. I
have north and south roots.
My grandfather started a manufacturing
company that my cousin still runs, and my
other grandfather ran a trucking company
based in New Jersey. I was born and raised in
Park Ridge and learned from a very young
age about the importance of serving and
community.
Both of my grandfathers served in World
War II.
What a family.
My family was always involved in charity
and our churches. And ever since I can remember, I wanted to help people, doing my
first fundraiser for homeless people in Bergen County, when I was maybe 8 or 9.
The passion for service took an international bend after I went abroad for the
first time during an exchange trip to Germany with Park Ridge Junior-Senior High
School in 2001 and fell in love with travel.
Shortly after that, September 11 happened.
Seven people from my little town were killed
in the towers, and we could see the smoke
from Ground Zero from a hill the next town
over.
For those of you who don’t know,
Park Ridge is very close to where I
grew up, and my childhood best friend
died in the Towers.
This was when I learned how my little suburban bubble could be impacted by things
worlds away. I became obsessed with trying
to help and wanting to drive a career that
would be in service to my country and people
elsewhere so that those people would be
more inclined to work with us than against
us.
I went on to study diplomacy and international relations at Seton Hall University,
graduating magna cum laude and determined
to work for the State Department at some
point.
My 15-year winding career path after that
took me into the advocacy space and onto
humanitarian and peace-building work in
Gaza with the U.N., as well as in Tunisia and
Egypt.
In 2022, after years as a policy advisor with
the International Committee of the Red
Cross, I was recruited to join USAID. And I
couldn’t have been more excited. This was a
dream job, an opportunity to serve my country and impact policy in a real way, sharing
what I had learned from working abroad and
at home to shape U.S. foreign policy and efforts to advance development and humanitarian assistance on the ground.
I was eventually promoted to a senior policy advisor role in USAID’s Office of Policy,
where I was developing policy that was shaping the way USAID worked, trying to break
down silos across the Agency, to be more effective and efficient in our response to some
of the toughest crises in the world.
I got the opportunity to not only prepare
talking points for high-level events and for
our leadership but even brief the administrator a couple of times.
That all came crashing down around January 28, as my colleagues began being terminated and furloughed.
I went into the Trump administration like
any other bureaucrat, ready to engage and
help because I want every administration—I
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00068 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.158 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2029
want every administration—to succeed and
lean on us as experts to help advance American policy. I worked with our team, and I
briefed our political appointee director, who
started on Inauguration Day, and hoped to
see what I could do to continue building on
the reform work I had been doing for a year
at that point.
Instead, everything quickly unraveled.
Elon Musk called USAID a criminal organization that should die, he said. And the
President of the United States deemed us
radical left lunatics. I was terrified, afraid of
what people might do when two of the most
powerful men in the world were saying
things like that.
Our jobs were then in question, and the
USAID offices were quickly closed, with our
belongings still in them. We were left not
knowing what our fate would be for weeks.
As DOJ dismantled USAID, I watched in
horror as the program shut down. The people
we served suffered, and friends and colleagues from the Agency, and our partner organizations lost their livelihoods and their
mission-driven careers.
On March 14, I was finally terminated. I
have been heartbroken since, shifting between deep depression and rage.
Because of the sledgehammer approach
that DOGE took, the entire foreign assistance architecture was broken. Organizations
I would have gone on to work for are going
bankrupt, cutting staff, and definitely not
hiring.
I spent 15 years building up this career
that I loved beyond words. Every time I
would leave my late father while he was
dying in a hospital in 2012, he would tell me
to go save the world. This wasn’t just a career; it was a calling to serve.
I have no idea what I will do next. In some
ways, I feel lucky, because I got married last
May—
God bless you—
and I am on my husband’s health insurance.
Thank God.
But he also works for the government, and
he could be RIFed within a moment’s notice.
I also have supportive family who will help
me if it really gets bad.
But the uncertainty has probably been one
of the most painful parts of all of this, not
knowing what will come next and just fearing it will be worse than the day before. All
we wanted to do was serve.
I want to say thank you to Julia Hurley from Bergen County—my home
county—New Jersey. Thank you for
your voice. Thank you for making your
pain plain and your anger, making it
real in my heart, as I know it is in
yours. I stand for you today.
A personal statement from Catherine
Baker from Neptune, NJ:
I have been furloughed from my job at my
USAID implementing partner since February
14, 2025. I have 13 years’ experience supporting USAID contractors and business development and recruitment efforts, mostly
in conflict and post-conflict settings.
The following is how I got here today: I
was born in Neptune and raised there until I
went to college. My father is a lifelong Neptune resident whose Jersey roots date all the
way back to early 1700s—
Wow—
when my Scottish ancestors came here in
search of religious freedom and economic opportunity to help build much of what is
Gloucester and Mercer Counties.
My mother is an immigrant born in Coro,
Venezuela, to refugees escaping fascism
bombs and economic ruin in Spain and Sicily. Every summer, my mom and I traveled
to Venezuela to see her mother, my aunts,
and uncles, and countless cousins. Coro, the
capital of Venezuela State, responsible for
most of oil refining, sits on the Caribbean
coast and is about a 15-minute plane ride
from Aruba, surrounded by sand dunes.
Our family friends lived in homes with dirt
floors, corrugated aluminum roofs, and a
hose out back you would use to shower while
fending off the chickens that roamed freely.
Coro is a city in constant drought. We
would get water every other day, and you
would use a trash bin filled with water and a
ladle to shower on your nonwater days. Coro,
as you could imagine, couldn’t be more different from Neptune, NJ.
I went to St. James Elementary and Red
Bank Catholic High School in Red Bank
from kindergarten through 12th grade. If 13
years of Catholic school teaches you anything, it is the importance of taking care of
one another, especially those that are suffering from poverty, famine, and disease.
I remember being given small cartons
where we were tasked with filling with spare
change so we could ship them off to some
faraway place, where we were told stories of
children just like us who were facing unimaginable hardships. I was so moved by the
notion that a child, not so different from
myself, didn’t have enough to eat or had lost
their parents in a conflict, I couldn’t begin
to understand.
My senior year at RBC, I took a class
called Globalization and Social Justice. The
class was taught by a longtime family friend,
Marianne Logan, herself a former nun. Ms.
Logan taught us about the Rwandan genocide and had us watch ‘‘Hotel Rwanda’’ as a
class. She made sure we knew the reasons
why this happened, understood how dehumanization and hatred can lead to mass torture and executions and critique the international response to the genocide that led to
nearly 1 million deaths in 100 days.
That year, Ms. Logan took us to King University to see Nick Kristof speak about
Darfur and made sure we knew the signs of
genocide when we saw it. How can we let this
happen again, we asked her. I wore my ‘‘Save
Darfur’’ green rubber bracelet and T-shirt
everywhere I went.
What could I, a kid living at the Jersey
Shore, do to help? During this period of enlightenment, led by Ms. Logan, the
Maryknoll missionaries-funded school in
Kibera, Kenya, that we were supporting was
threatened by electoral violence in December of 2007. We received letters from the nuns
there, who were Ms. Logan’s personal
friends, about how the fires nearly reached
the school and the children, who were already living in Africa’s largest slums, stood
poised to lose the little they had, including
their lives.
Upon returning from Christmas break,
Maryknoll Affiliate’s club sprang into action. We raised awareness and funds and
proudly sent money from bake sales and
doorknocking to our friends in Kenya. We received media attention from WCBS in New
York, and our story got picked up by other
channels and newspapers.
I was amazed that my efforts in Monmouth
County were having such meaningful and
real impact on a crisis happening thousands
of miles away. I was passionate about this
work. I was seemingly good at it, or as good
as an 18-year-old could be. Could I actually
turn this into a career? Could I help even
more people across the world?
I’d like to think I did that. I’d like to
think I did that. And I am crying as I write
this because I wonder if I ever will do it
again.
The past 10 years, I focused on conflict prevention, stabilization, preventing countering
violent extremism, and citizen insecurity,
conflict, or post-conflict areas. Not only did
I conduct desk research and analyzed problem sets from behind a desk, but I got to
travel to those countries and meet with local
governments, civil society organizations,
and advocacy groups to hear from them
about the issues and discuss solutions.
I spoke to survivors of the devastating 2004
tsunami in Sri Lanka and Tamil. Fathers
and brothers disappeared during the civil
war and are likely burned in unmarked
graves somewhere on the island.
I worked closely with a woman my age
whose families fled Kosovo to the United
States during the war when we were about 9
years old and returned as soon as she could
to her home country to promote continued
peace between Albanians and Serbs.
My recent trips to Kosovo were so illuminating not because of the pain or struggle
of these people but because of the respect
and admiration and gratitude they had toward the United States of America.
Anyone who has been to Pristina knows of
the Bill Clinton and Bob Dole statues—
I didn’t know about that—
as well as the Hillary Boutique.
A few years ago when I was negotiating an
employment offer with a Ghanaian candidate
for a USAID-funded preventing violent extremism program, I couldn’t meet his salary expectations. He said to me, ‘‘That is OK. I will
take whatever you can give me. If the United
States will make sacrifices for the people of
Ghana in support of this program, I am willing to make a sacrifice too with a pay cut.’’
He proudly accepted the offer. The recognition that these funds could be spent elsewhere was not lost on him.
Generosity and kindness are always more
greatly appreciated by those who have less.
All but one of my company’s USAID contracts, which totaled nearly $400 million,
were terminated almost overnight by DOGE.
Over 80 percent of our Virginia-based office
was laid off or furloughed.
I bought my first condo last year—a milestone we all strive for but too few people my
age are able to achieve. I applied to 60 jobs
in 1 month, all of which I am qualified for,
before I received two interview requests—
this after being a sought-after professional
in my industry with a strong network cultivated through years of hard work. This has
ruined me.
My mortgage payment isn’t what makes
me cry, though; it is our local staff and partners that come to mind every night as I say
my prayers. My colleague, a Sudanese refugee living in Kampala, working on a terminated USAID peace-building program from
Sudan, texts me every week to ask how I am
doing. He called me to make me smile because he knew I was crying. He now calls me
‘‘sad eyes’’ and has made it his mission to
never see tears fall from these lashes again.
I obviously lie to him and say ‘‘mission accomplished,’’ but it will never be true.
Not only is the United States not stronger,
not safer, not more prosperous, but the beacon of our democracy grows dim across the
globe. Without leadership, other countries
hostile to the United States will step in, and
innocent people will continue dying.
When I close my eyes, the specter of very
real people from my travels and projects appear, and I hear the echoes of suffering they
shared with me, suffering they were sure to
know was alleviated, however temporarily,
by the United States of America through
USAID.
And wherever they could, they would
thank me. Whenever they could, they would
thank me and America. They would thank
me and America for it.
Thank you, Catherine Baker from
Neptune, NJ. And Catherine, I see you.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 07:13 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00069 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.159 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2030 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
I see you, Catherine. I hear you. I stand
for you. But I want to share something
with you.
One of the most extraordinary trips I
have had as a U.S. Senator was to
Chad, to go up to the border of Chad
and Sudan and see the horrors—I have
been to refugee camps all around the
globe, but to see the horrors of what
was happening again in Sudan.
You wore that ‘‘Save Darfur’’ T-shirt
in your earlier days, but the ethnic
cleansing is going on right now. I have
never seen so many malnourished babies, barely able to hold up their heads,
people fleeing tyranny. And they fled
across the border to meet Americans
because we were there. With less than
1 percent of the American budget, we
were there, standing for our values, our
highest ideals, our faith traditions—
the understanding that when we are
out there making the world safer, responding to crises, not only were people seeing the help they need, but they
saw the light and the beacon of this democracy.
And it pains me that CHRIS COONS
comes down here and shares the headlines from today’s newspaper that in
Myanmar, in this horrific earthquake,
the Agency that used to respond to
that tragedy, that human tragedy,
doesn’t have the resources. America is
not there. It is a void.
And then CHRIS COONS says, in the article I am surely to read today or tomorrow, whenever I can’t stand anymore—he says: Who fills that vacuum?
Who showed up but the PRC. China
showed up.
Less than 1 percent of our budget.
Less than 1 percent of our budget, and
people like the folks I read from—
whose whole life all they wanted to do
was to be the light of the American
torch of freedom and hope to the
world—had the rug pulled out from
under them.
But here is what is worse, because we
have had, CHRIS MURPHY, meetings
with some of the people behind the
scenes that they are savagely cutting,
and the stories are horrible: people in
dangerous places that we sent there
having their emails cut, having their
phones turned off; pregnant women
who don’t know how they are going to
get out of those areas.
And James Mattis, as we discussed,
said: If you cut these kind of programs,
buy me more bullets because there will
be more instability; there will be more
political democracies being overthrown; there will be more terrorism;
there will be more violence.
And we are old enough as a nation at
250 years to know that if we don’t meet
these terrorists abroad, they will visit
us at home. As CHUCK SCHUMER said, I
was there watching the towers come
down. And in the Sahel before, in Africa, that is the threat—in Togo, in
Ghana, in Benin. In northern parts of
the country, they are fighting terrorism.
Mr. MURPHY. Will the Senator yield
for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. Oh, God, yes, I will. I
yield for a question while retaining the
floor, CHRIS MURPHY.
Mr. MURPHY. We have a few more
colleagues who are going to join us before the top of the hour, but I just
wanted you to round this out and ask
you the question this way.
Often, when we talk about the withdrawal of USAID from the world, the
withdrawal of the United States from
international bodies like the WHO, the
beneficiary is China. But I think you
were hinting, as you talked about the
African continent, that the threat is
much broader than that because
USAID is not just doing counter-China
programming; it is also doing counterextremism programming. In Lebanon,
for instance, it is doing the primary
work to push back against Hezbollah’s
political influence there. It is doing
work to counter Russian influence
around its periphery.
And so isn’t it the case, Senator
BOOKER, that as USAID is pulled off the
playing field, for reasons we still don’t
understand, that it is all of our adversaries—state adversaries and nonstate
adversaries—who are, tragically, celebrating at this opening that we have
given them to gain additional influence?
Mr. BOOKER. Senator MURPHY, that
is correct. You have been one of the
most articulate voices for this decision—I shouldn’t even call it a decision—this reckless trashing of USAID,
this vilification of the proud men and
women that stand in Ebola outbreaks,
that stand in terrorism, that stand
against hardships and ethnic cleansing,
that stand against malnutrition.
You are so good at pointing out that
those are American interests and that
not to do that makes this a more dangerous and unsafe world, a world where
countries like ours want to lob missiles
into Yemen, post-facto of crises.
So I hear you, CHRIS MURPHY, and I
answer your question with a simple understanding that what you are saying
is right. And I am going to tell you
that I have got so many others to read,
but we are way behind schedule of
where we wanted to be at this point.
We are way behind at about 16 hours
and 24 minutes.
And so, to obey my staff, as Senators
are told to do, I want to move quickly
to just the housing issues. So I want to
move quickly to housing and start,
really, with the theme of affordable
housing.
Again, we keep returning to the
economy and how the Trump administration is making things worse in
every area, especially for people struggling. And so let me be clear that, for
decades, under Democrat and Republican Presidents, it has become increasingly difficult for working-class
Americans to afford a home.
In recent years, this nationwide
housing affordability crisis for so many
Americans has nearly reached a breaking point. The crisis now impacts nearly all Americans, shared across all demographics. Regardless of partisan
identification, race, age, gender, education, or whether you own or rent
your home, we in America are in a
housing crisis.
According to the Center for American Progress, 80 percent of Americans
living in rural communities believe
housing affordability is getting worse,
while 72 percent of residents in urban
areas feel the same way. In October
2024, the Center for American Progress
found, no matter your ZIP Code, the
goal of homeownership in America is
drifting further out of reach all across
the country.
Over the past two decades, housing
costs have dramatically outpaced income growth in the United States, increasing the rent burden, heightening
barriers for homeownership. The Housing Price Index, a gauge of how selling
prices for single-family homes have
changed over time, was more than 50
percent higher in July 2024 than it was
in July 2019.
According to the Brookings Institution, the U.S. housing market was
short 4.9 million housing units in 2023
relative to the mid-2000s. Decades of
policy at the Federal, State, and local
levels have all contributed to this reality. Let’s not blame some rank partisanship; it has been decades in the
making.
There are far too few homes in the
United States, and there are far too
few homes being built in the United
States. The cost of housing keeps rising. Rents continue to skyrocket. Median home prices are on the rise, which
makes it harder and harder for families
to make ends meet.
The vast majority of young Americans are hard-pressed to save for the
chance of one day having enough for a
downpayment to buy a home. Almost
half of all renters in America struggle
to pay their rent. Almost half of all
renters are struggling to pay the rent,
devoting more than one-third of their
income to housing costs.
Since the pandemic, rents have
jumped more than 12 percent year over
year. Hidden rental fees and other expenses on already cost-burdened tenants continue to mount as landlords
assume more and more power and leverage, leaving tenants and prospective
home buyers with nowhere to turn.
Last year, NPR methodically walked
through the supply shortage that is impacting our country.
But before I read this article, I see
that my colleague, my friend, the extraordinary leader from Maryland, is
here, and I think he has a question for
me first.
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. Will the Senator
yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I will yield for a question while retaining the floor.
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. I want to thank
my friend, and I want to start by
thanking the Senator from New Jersey,
the senior Senator from New Jersey,
for shining a spotlight on what is happening in our country at this moment
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00070 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.161 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2031
and specifically what is going to be
happening here in the U.S. Senate later
this week or next.
And I have a question for the Senator, but I want to take some of the
threads of what you have been saying
as I put this to you because you are
shining a light on the great betrayal.
And that is, Candidate Trump went all
over the country saying that he was
going to be a President for the forgotten Americans, that he was going to be
a President that looked out for working people, and he said he was going to
focus on bringing costs down and prices
down in the United States of America.
And yet, ever since he was sworn in,
he has done just the opposite. Prices
are going up—including, as the Senator
was talking about, housing prices. Affordable housing is a crisis in this
country, and yet we see Elon Musk and
his DOGE cronies cutting deeply into
affordable housing programs over at
the Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
We see also—and tomorrow, he calls
it Liberation Day; it is actually going
to be Sales Tax Increase Day—there
was testimony that we got in the
Banking and Housing Committee that
when you increase these tariffs on Canada, as he has proposed to do—not in a
targeted way but in an across-theboard way—according to the National
Association of Home Builders, that will
increase housing prices for Americans
up to 10 percent more at a time when
we are already facing an affordable
housing crisis.
And, of course, the folks who benefit
the most are those billionaires who are
part of his Cabinet and others in the
hedge fund industry who are going out
and buying up a lot of houses, not because they need the house for their
family but because they want to flip it
at a big profit, making it even less affordable to the American people.
So the housing crisis is one part of
what is getting even worse because of
the actions of Donald Trump and Elon
Musk. And it is part of this greater
theme of the great betrayal.
Later this week, Republicans here in
the Senate say they are planning to
bring to the floor what we call a budget
resolution, which is a framework that
will be providing for very big tax cuts
for the ultra-rich Americans, tax cuts
for big corporations, some of which are
offshoring all of their profits.
Senator WYDEN and I were on the
floor, just last week, talking about how
Pfizer has half of its sales revenues
here in the United States but books
none of its profits here, and, therefore,
by this scheme called round-tripping
where you sort of push your money
around the world, they lower their
taxes, which means the American people get shortchanged.
So all of this is part of a scheme to
provide tax cuts for the very wealthy
at everybody else’s expense.
The Senator from New Jersey has
been shining a light on what it means
when we say this will come at the expense of other Americans, that this tax
cut for the very rich and big corporations will come at the expense of the
rest of America. I want to amplify that
as I do a windup to the Senator.
No. 1, it is Elon Musk and the DOGE
operation. Let me be very clear that
this is part of the most corrupt bargain
we have seen in American history. Elon
Musk spent $280 million to help elect
Donald Trump President, and Donald
Trump has turned the keys to the Federal Government over to Elon Musk,
not for efficiency but to rig the government in favor of people like Elon
Musk.
That is why they want to get rid of
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. This is a Bureau that has returned billions of dollars to Americans
who were cheated by scam artists, and
they are coming in to dismantle the
CFPB because they want to be on the
side of the scam artists and deny
American consumers the benefit of getting their dollars back when they have
been cheated.
So this has nothing to do with government efficiency. It has to do both
with rigging the government for people
like Elon Musk and trying to lay the
groundwork claiming lots of cuts that
they will then use to pay for, they say,
tax cuts for the very rich.
So who is being cut by Elon Musk?
I don’t know, Senator, if you saw the
other day in the sort of spin room at
the White House—did you catch that,
where Elon Musk and some of his folks
were explaining the work they did?
They said: We are really doing this
with a scalpel.
Well, the reason that is especially interesting is it was just weeks earlier
when Elon Musk brandished a chain
saw, right?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes. Yes.
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. At CPAC, which
is actually—they met over here in my
State of Maryland.
That is what they are doing. They
are taking a chain saw, and they are
taking a chain saw to Departments
that help our veterans. These are people who care for our veterans, and our
veterans are being especially hard-hit,
including when they did these firings—
arbitrary firings, right?—of probationary employees, and veterans were
saying: Why are we being hit so hard?
The White House spokesperson said:
Perhaps they are not fit to have a job at
the moment.
That was the response from one of
the White House spokespersons, as if
the individuals who served our country
in the military were not fit to serve
our government as civilians. That is
the kind of attitude we have got.
We just learned today that the
RIFs—the reduction-in-force letters—
were received by the folks in the Department of Health and Human Services.
So these are people who help with the
public health of all Americans. And
they do important work at FDA, or the
Food and Drug Administration. They
make sure that the foods we eat and
the medicines we take are safe and
that they do what they say they are
going to do in the case of medicines.
They do work at NIH, the National
Institutes of Health, to develop cures
and treatments for diseases that hit
every American family, and they are
cutting there.
They are cutting in these places not
for government efficiency but to create
what they believe is the space for tax
cuts for the very rich. We talked about
what they are doing over at the Department of Health, at the Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
At the Social Security Administration—which, by the way, has its headquarters in my State of Maryland—we
have thousands of workers who were
there to deliver hard-earned benefits to
the American people. And the reality is
that the Social Security Administration operates incredibly efficiently.
You know the former Commissioner
for Social Security, Martin O’Malley,
reminds us that Allstate Insurance
Company operates at an 11-percent
overhead. Liberty Mutual operates at a
23-percent overhead. The Social Security Administration: .5 percent overhead.
The Social Security Administration
workforce is now at a very low level in
terms of personnel, compared to what
it was years ago. And yet they are serving a record number of Americans—73
million Americans—and they have
never missed a payment. They have
never missed a payment.
So this talk about going after Social
Security and that they are going to
somehow make it more efficient—and,
of course, Elon Musk called it a Ponzi
scheme, when the Senator and I know
it is not a Ponzi scheme. It is a promise
to the American people.
So, first, they discontinue telephone
service, as if all the seniors could,
somehow, just connect, you know, by
Wi-Fi, or whatever it may be. A lot of
people, of course, rely on telephones.
So they cut that. They said: Well, if
you have trouble, go to one of the local
regional Social Security offices. Well,
they are cutting regional Social Security offices—lots of them.
And then, when you go there and you
don’t find many people there—you
know, whoops, we just cut 7,000 people
from Social Security. So a benefit is
meaningless if you can’t actually access the benefit. And what they are
doing is making it harder for Americans to get those benefits.
So when we hear about the MuskDOGE operation, make no mistake, it
is not about efficiency. It is about trying to put together some kind of savings that they then want to use to at
least just partially pay for tax cuts for
the very rich.
Another way they are doing that—we
have heard a lot about that; the Senator spoke about it—is cutting Medicaid and food nutrition programs. In
fact, I think we recall, a number of
weeks ago, that we had a couple of
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00071 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.162 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2032 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
amendments here on the floor of the
Senate, saying: OK, if you are going to
do these tax cuts, at least don’t cut
Medicaid or Medicare or food and nutrition programs.
Every Republican Senator voted
against those amendments—in other
words, not to protect those programs—
meaning they are fair game for big cuts
to pay for tax cuts for the very
wealthy.
So that is another area where they
are very focused, which is cutting important programs that benefit millions
and millions of Americans.
There is another way they are doing
it—and to the Senator from New Jersey, again, thank you for shining a
light on all this; he has talked about
it—which is these across-the-board tariffs.
So I think all of us know that strategically targeted tariffs can be useful,
at certain points in time, to protect
strategic American industries. I am for
those. But across-the-board tariffs and
across-the-board tariffs on a friend and
ally like Canada or Mexico—all that is,
is a tax increase on the American people. Let’s be clear.
So these are the areas where Donald
Trump, having said that he was going
to be there for working people, is doing
the opposite, right? These across-theboard tariffs are going to increase costs
and prices for the American people.
Cutting Medicaid and food nutrition
programs is going to hurt the very people that Donald Trump on the campaign trail said he was fighting for.
And the DOGE-Musk operation is
taking a chain saw to important services and important consumer protections that benefit all Americans in
order to claim that they are providing
some savings for tax cuts for the rich.
So it wasn’t that long ago that, just
down the hall here, Donald Trump was
sworn in as President. And I remember
what he said. He said:
This is going to be a golden age for America.
And who was sitting right behind
him? Elon Musk, the richest person in
the world, and other billionaires in the
Trump Cabinet, including one who just
said, not that long ago, that Americans
on Social Security wouldn’t miss one
of their Social Security checks; only
the fraudsters would notice that.
Say that to the 73 million people who
get Social Security. But that is the attitude of the billionaires in this Trump
Cabinet, the people he is really looking
out for.
So when he says ‘‘a golden age for
America,’’ that is who he means. He
means Elon Musk and the billionaires—Elon Musk, who is rigging the
government for the billionaires and all
the others in the Cabinet who don’t
think Americans would miss a Social
Security payment that they earned.
So my question to you—and I want
to, again, thank the Senator from New
Jersey. I know it has been a long day’s
journey into the night, but it is important that we address these issues in the
courts—and the courts are upholding
the rule of law—that we address these
issues and then fight them in Congress,
and that we do so in communities
across the country, and people need to
understand what is happening.
So the core issue here, is it not, my
friend, that Donald Trump really is betraying the people he said he was going
to fight for, and, at the end of the
day—and we will see that later this
week in the Senate—the goal is to provide these big tax breaks to wealthy
people at the expense of everybody else
in America. That is the big betrayal.
So if you could just zero in, once
again, on the central narrative that we
are seeing play out in the Trump administration.
Mr. BOOKER. You are putting it
right. Donald Trump made commitments to America. We have quotes of
him at rally after rally. He said: ‘‘Grocery,’’ that is a really great word, he
said. I am going to bring down grocery
prices.
Well, grocery prices are up dramatically. The American dream, many of us
see that as owning a home. Well, you
said it: Home prices are already up, but
with these tariffs, they can go upward
of 10 percent or more. You can be sure
that the Canadian lumber coming down
here is going to be expensive.
You can see Donald Trump making it
more difficult to access healthcare, and
this massive reconciliation is going to
be a direct attack on working-class
healthcare, on healthcare of expectant
mothers, on healthcare of Americans
with disabilities, on healthcare of the
majority of seniors in nursing homes.
I am about to go to my next chapter.
It is all going to be about how Trump
is rolling back commonsense protections for clean air and water. ELIZABETH WARREN said it very powerfully:
He is reducing services, which is a service cut to people with Social Security.
In so many ways, Americans should see
these crises looming—these attacks—
but ask yourself one economic question: With the stock market, which
just had its worst quarter in years, and
people’s retirement savings, if they
have it in 401(k)’s, is going down—ask
yourself this question. I ask Americans, please, ask yourself this financial
question: Am I better off than I was 71
days ago? Am I better off or worse off?
And this is before he has even gotten
going, because we see what is about to
happen with this whole sham reconciliation process. They are already trying
to change the rules to obscure what
they are doing.
This is what they are doing. Three
things you should take home:
Are we going to let them again—like
they did with the ACA, with the Affordable Care Act—come after
healthcare for 70-plus million Americans by doing their proposed $880 billion cuts?
Are we going to allow them to blow a
hole so big, in the trillions of dollars?
They are going to push it out over 10
years. They are going to create such a
deficit in our country that our children’s children—they are stealing from
our children’s children and putting on
a deficit that they are going to have to
pay for.
No. 3, are they going to let them do
all of that to renew tax cuts that the
Congressional Budget Office, a very
independent Agency, says very clearly
would give trillions of dollars of tax
cuts that go disproportionately to the
wealthiest in our Nation.
That is the addition. That is what we
know. And it doesn’t account for the
things he is doing to our allies. It
doesn’t account for how he is turning
his back on NATO. It doesn’t account
for how he is praising Putin and calling
Zelenskyy a dictator. It doesn’t account for how he is giving advantage to
China around the world, from the region in Southeast Asia all the way to
Africa. It doesn’t account for how he
has already made it harder to enroll in
the Affordable Care Act. It doesn’t account for all the other things he is
doing that we wake up and hear every
day, not to mention trying to threaten
Greenland, trying to threaten Panama,
trying to change the name of the Gulf
of Mexico.
All these things he didn’t tell us he
was going to do, didn’t promise. He
promised to lower your grocery prices;
they are higher. He promised to be a
better steward of the economy; it is
worse than what he inherited it. Over
and over, he is breaking promises and
doing outrageous things, like disappearing people off of American
streets, violating fundamental principles of this document, invoking the
Alien Enemies Act from the 1700s that
was last used to put Japanese-Americans in internment camps.
Do we see what is happening? How
much is enough? We have to stand and
do something different not just in this
body but in America because—you
know this—how we stopped him in his
last term was the American people rose
up, spoke up, stood up, rose up in the
most extraordinary, nonviolent demonstrations and demands.
So thank you.
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. Will the Senator
yield for another question?
Mr. BOOKER. Yes, I will yield for a
question while retaining the floor.
Mr. VAN HOLLEN. And I see my
friend and colleague Senator
ALSOBROOKS from the great State of
Maryland is on the floor, so I am going
to be very brief with this question.
I want to thank you for reminding
us, of course, of the other great betrayal that has been going on over the
last 70-plus days. There is the betrayal
against the American people and working people here at home, but there has
been a betrayal of our allies, like the
Ukrainians, whom Donald Trump is
throwing under the bus as we speak,
and other close partners and allies
around the world.
I have to depart here for a moment
because we have a hearing in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00072 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.164 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
March 31, 2025 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S2033
I am privileged to serve on that committee with the gentleman from New
Jersey. One of the people before the
committee is their nominee to be our
Ambassador to Turkey.
Now, of course, Erdogan just locked
up his major opponent, the popular
mayor of Istanbul. We have not heard a
peep from the Trump administration
about the question of how this undermines democracy.
But I want to close on the point that
you just raised. It is kind of hard for
Donald Trump to complain about
Erdogan disappearing people when
right here in the United States of
America, you had a Turkish student at
Tufts disappeared by people who
showed up without any identification,
some with hoods on, and sent her apparently to Louisiana because she
spoke out on an important issue of national concern.
The First Amendment is pretty clear
that you can engage in controversial
speech that someone may like or dislike, but you are protected. That includes everybody here in America because that is an important value to us.
Apparently, it is not an important
value to Donald Trump, who, like
Erdogan, essentially wants to whisk
away anybody who disagrees with him.
I again thank the Senator from New
Jersey and just ask him, you know, to
elaborate on that. But I also see my
friend and colleague the Senator from
Maryland.
Mr. BOOKER. I will give a short answer to your question, then, which is
the irony—the irony that this President is remaining quiet about folks
that are violating international law in
many ways.
So I think it is absurd, and you are
right. It is another betrayal.
Ms. ALSOBROOKS. Will the Senator
yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. I yield for a question
while retaining the floor.
Ms. ALSOBROOKS. First, I would
like to commend my colleague. I want
to thank you first of all for your spiritual obedience. I want to thank you so
much as well for your commitment and
your dedication. I want to thank you
as well for your courageous leadership.
I want to thank you also, Senator
BOOKER, for your recognition of the
times that we are living in. These are
times that we will recount and our
children will recount, and I think all of
those of good conscience who watch
during this time and say nothing will
also be held to account.
As the Senator has eloquently remarked, these are not normal times.
We are watching an administration
that is drunk with vengeance, hatred,
and surrounded by incompetent people
who are taking callous actions, who
are inhumane, and, because of their incompetence, are making costly mistakes that will harm the American
people and denigrate the hard-working
people of this country by proposing tax
cuts.
These tax cuts are not designed to
help the average American person;
they are designed to help billionaires.
They are doing so by firing thousands
of middle-class workers and more.
What we are seeing before our eyes is
not only unconscionable; we know as
well that it is deeply immoral, that it
is inhumane, it is wicked.
We are seeing—with glee—the actions
of people who are so happy to tear
down, but I am watching and waiting
to see what it is they intend to build in
this country.
In your remarks over these hours,
you have made that plain for the
American people to see. You have uplifted the stories of everyday people.
And what we recognize as we hear
about the firings and we hear about the
devastation and chaos is that we are
not talking about numbers, we are
talking about humans, about people.
These are our friends. These are our
family members. These are our neighbors. These are our church friends.
These are our colleagues this administration has harmed.
So my question today centers around
the topic of housing. We have a housing
crisis in this country. That is no secret. In fact, we recognize that,
through the actions of this administration, what is harmful will be exacerbated.
Maryland is nearly 100,000 housing
units short, and as you know, it is both
about affordability and a supply problem. We need to make home ownership,
which is part of the American dream
and how the average American builds
wealth in this country, accessible to
more Americans.
I think about my parents, Mr. Senator, who married at 21 and 22 years
old. At the time that they married, although my father was a car salesman
and selling newspapers and my mother
was a receptionist, 5 years into their
marriage, they could afford to buy a
home.
This is no longer the expectation of
the average American family. My own
19-year-old daughter doesn’t have the
realistic hope that she can follow even
her grandparents. This problem affects
red States, and it affects blue States,
which is the theme that you have hit
on in all of these hours of speaking.
When this President acts against the
interests of the middle class, we recognize that he is not just harming Democrats, as he intends, but unfortunately
his actions harm everyday Americans.
It affects those who voted for him, it
affects those who didn’t vote for him,
and it affects those who did not vote at
all. He is harming Republicans too. He
is harming Americans.
This administration is slashing funding and personnel at the very Agencies
that are tasked with addressing this
crisis. He is illegally firing HUD employees. This administration has
stalled millions of dollars in previously
allocated funding intended to help
those who need affordable housing.
Again, his actions are so indiscriminate, so immoral, so callous, so heartless that he is impacting the very people who supported him as well as those
who didn’t.
This administration has effectively
ended enforcement of the Fair Housing
Act, one of the most important American civil rights laws. This administration is considering privatizing the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which
guarantees over half of the U.S. mortgage market. To make matters worse,
this administration is proposing sweeping tariffs on our allies, driving up the
cost of home construction.
Let’s be clear. Absolutely none of
this will help to build homes. None of
this will make home ownership more
accessible to Marylanders or Americans. In fact, we understand that it is
not the intention of this administration to do so; it is for the billionaires,
to be able to afford their tax cuts.
(Mr. CURTIS assumed the Chair.)
So I have heard from people all
across my State—blue areas, red areas,
purple areas, every area—who are concerned about this.
So I have a question for you, and I
want to thank you as I ask the question, for sacrificing your own body
today to bring attention to this. What
are you seeing in the State of New Jersey about how this administration’s
unconscionable actions are making
housing less affordable and home ownership less accessible?
Mr. BOOKER. I want to thank the
Senator for the question. I want to
thank her for being my colleague. But
more important than even being my
friend, she is a spiritual sister of mine
and was very kind to me when I was
telling her that I was going to do this
and gave me so much encouragement
and prayer.
And I just love you, and I am grateful.
You read a litany of things. I had a
whole section, a whole binder that my
staff told me to skip to go to this one
about all the things, going in deep, indepth to all the things the Trump administration is doing to make housing
more unaffordable, more inaccessible,
more expensive, more discrimination
in housing, which we know is still a
problem, more challenges, more pain
heaped upon rural areas, and more
complications and problems for building affordable housing in all areas.
It is so frustrating to me that this is
a problem. We cannot lay the crisis of
housing at one administration in the
United States. We need to have bold visions and ideas to address this. I am so
excited about this next generation of
Americans that are rising up with bold
visions.
I want to give a shout-out to Ezra
Klein. His book is a must read—‘‘Abundance.’’ This is a vision of doing great
things again, of building housing, of redeeming the American dream.
But to have a President that is dead
set on, for the next 4 years, doing the
kinds of things that you made a litany
of and now, tomorrow, is going to bring
tariffs that are going to raise the price
even more on housing is outrageous.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00073 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.165 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE
S2034 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 31, 2025
Where are his promises to make this
country more affordable and more accessible?
You heard the data that I read about
how we have so many millions of
Americans—close to the majority of
renters now spend more than a third of
their income on rent, which is the very
definition that our government has of
housing insecurity.
So it should anger people in this
country. Even if you own your home,
have paid off your mortgage, you
should be angry about what they are
doing to the American dream and that
there are no bold ideas coming from
this administration to help. In fact,
they are hurting it. They are hurting
it.
So thank you very much to my colleague. Thank you for giving me
strength, as you did, and prayer. I
thank you for the question that should
anger people, that should inspire people, that should activate people, that
should engage people, that should demand from us that we take our country
away from those who want to do so
much harm.
I want to start by reading until
someone—I know the prayer. I am
going to keep going. I want to talk
about environmental protections and
how this country is becoming less safe
for people with emphysema or with
asthma because Donald Trump is rolling back commonsense environmental
protections, threatening our children’s
future, and hurting our Nation’s economy.
Energy costs in America are continuing to rise, making it harder and
harder for working families to pay
their bills. At a time when we should
be investing in clean energy, this administration is canceling projects that
would create more jobs for Americans
and lower energy prices. He claims he
supports an ‘‘all of the above’’ strategy, but that is clearly not what we are
seeing, and there is too much silence
about it.
All Americans, regardless of where
you are born, deserve safe drinking
water, clean air, and equal opportunity
for a healthy and fulfilling life.
President Trump promised America
the cleanest air and the cleanest water,
but on entering office, he immediately
instructed the EPA—the Environmental Protection Agency—to cut a
long list of commonsense environmental protections. This administration is rolling back efforts to reduce
emissions from powerplants. He is letting polluters pollute our air more.
That affects the health of Americans.
It drives up the aggravating of the
rates of asthma and emphysema, weakening rules that keep our rivers and
water systems clean as well.
f
PRAYER
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Pursuant
to the order of February 29, 1960, the
hour of 12 noon having arrived, the
Senate having been in continuous session since yesterday, the Senate will
suspend for a prayer by the Senate
Chaplain.
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
Lord of Hosts, you have done great
things for us, filling our hearts with
determination to do Your will. You
protect us from unseen dangers, supply
us with wisdom, and direct our steps.
Today, we are grateful for the efforts
of the floor staff, the Capitol Police,
the stenographers, the pages, and all
those who have worked through the
night. We pray You give them the
strength they need for this day.
Today, give our Senators the assurance of Your presence, inspire them
with a calm faith, a steady peace, and
a firm resolve to do Your will. Let no
weapon formed against them prosper.
We pray in Your omnipotent Name.
Amen.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from New Jersey is recognized.
f
EXECUTIVE CALENDAR
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION
Mr. BOOKER. I am going to continue
until one of my colleagues asks me a
question.
Ms. DUCKWORTH. Will the Senator
yield for a question?
Mr. BOOKER. One of my heroes in
the Senate—a living legend, my partner on some bills that I am so passionate about, expanding IVF—someone that is just freaking awesome, I
yield for a question while retaining the
floor.
Ms. DUCKWORTH. Thank you, Senator BOOKER, for taking this important
stand and for doing so much to make it
clear how much pain Donald Trump
and Elon Musk are inflicting on the
American people in every sector of our
society.
I am going to be asking you a question about what you heard from agriculture businesses in your State about
the damage this administration is
doing and the jobs that either have
been or will be lost as a result. I
thought I would give you some background on what I am hearing as well.
I want to focus this body’s attention
on our Nation’s farmers and ranchers
who seem to be getting punched day
after day, week after week by the
Trump-Musk oligarchy. Whether it is
their harmful tariffs that hurt our soy
and corn farmers, canceling and freezing more than $1 billion in funding for
schools and food banks that purchase
food from local farmers, or halting reimbursement and contract payments
that our farmers already owed.
The Senator from New Jersey and I
are both working together to undo
some of the most harmful impacts of
these disastrous decisions, including
joining forces to push his Honor Farmers Contract forward. We are starting
to hear reports by farmers how damaging the Musk-Trump dismantling of
USAID is to jobs and businesses right
here in America.
For example, I don’t know if the Senator has heard, but in North Carolina,
they had $2.2 billion in USAID awards,
including for 27 large-scale farmers
who were fulfilling orders to humanitarian food assistance and four universities who were receiving agriculture
research funding. More than 300 North
Carolina workers have lost their jobs
as a result of this freeze.
In Georgia, they had over $389 million in USAID awards, including nine
large-scale farmers fulfilling orders for
humanitarian food assistance and six
universities receiving agriculture research funding.
Arkansas had over $210 million in
USAID awards, including purchases of
rice, grain, and beans from our farmers.
Florida has lost $91 million in USAID
awards, including $38 million for the
University of Florida to improve livestock productivity and food security in
developing countries.
Texas lost over $48 million in USAID
awards, including nine large-scale
farmers fulfilling orders for humanitarian food assistance and eight universities receiving agriculture research
funding. The list goes on and on.
My neighbors in Iowa, over time now,
have lost over $4 million in USDA food
commodity sales. They have gained—
they had a total of over $149 million in
purchases through USDA and other
programs for USAID. Illinois has lost
$245 million in aid that—in farm income, that would go toward USAID and
aid programs.
I think that our farmers have been
hit with body blow after body blow
from this administration, an administration that in their first term and
even in the second term promised they
would look out for America.
I have to say to my friend from New
Jersey, I don’t think that this administration has lived up to their promises
to farmers. Remember that a Nation
that cannot feed itself—if we lose those
family farms, if we lose our ag sector—
we cannot lead the free world if we cannot feed ourselves. And, frankly, farmers have been hit over and over again.
These incoming tariffs are going to
be a disaster for our farmers. I was in
south central and southern Illinois
across the river from Missouri talking
to our farmers in St. Clair County, IL.
They tell me the tariffs are going to affect their products being sold overseas.
Our top products in Illinois: corn, soybean, pork.
We are also the largest grower of
pumpkins. If you get the Libby can of
pumpkin at Halloween time and Christmastime, Thanksgiving, that is thanks
to Illinois. If you ever want to come, I
will take you out to the pumpkin
fields. They are the best pumpkins in
the country.
But frankly, they are being hurt over
and over again. So they are going to
see the prices on their commodities affected. They can’t sell their products
overseas to the top countries that purchase their product. At the same time,
VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:58 Apr 02, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00074 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G31MR6.166 S31MRPT2
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with SENATE